<h2>CHAPTER ONE: The Tragedy</h2>

<p>Ruth Averill moved slowly across the drawing
room at Starvel, and stood dejectedly at the
window, looking out at the Scotch firs swaying in the
wind and the sheets of rain driving across the
untidy lawn before the house.</p>

<p>The view was even more depressing than usual
on this gloomy autumn afternoon. Beyond the
grass-grown drive and the broken-down paling of
posts and wire which bounded the grounds, lay the
open moor, wild and lonely and forbidding. A
tumble of dun-coloured sedgy grass with darker
smudges where rock out-cropped, it stretched up,
bleak and dreary, to the lip of the hollow in which
the dilapidated old house had been built.</p>

<p>To the girl standing in the window with a
brooding look of melancholy on her pretty features the
outlook seemed symbolical of her life, for Ruth
Averill was not one of those whose lives could be
said to have fallen in pleasant places.</p>

<p>But, in spite of her unhappy expression, she was
good to look at as she stood watching the storm.
Though rather under medium height she had a
charming figure and something of a presence. She
was dark, as though in her veins might flow some
admixture of Spanish or Italian blood. Her
features were small and delicate, but her firmly
rounded chin gave promise of character. She
scarcely looked her twenty years of age.</p>

<p>But though she had the fresh vitality of youth,
there was something old-fashioned in her
appearance not out of accord with her surroundings. She
wore her long dark hair piled up in great masses
over her broad forehead. Her dress was of the
plainest, and in the fashion of three years earlier.
Though scrupulously neat, it was worn threadbare.
Her shoes were cracked and her stockings showed
careful darns.</p>

<p>For Ruth Averill was an orphan, dependent on
the bounty of her uncle, Simon Averill, for every
penny. And Simon Averill was a miser.</p>

<p>Ruth was born in Southern France, and she had
dim recollections of a land of sun and warmth, of
jolly people and bright colours. But since she had
come to this gloomy old house in the wilds of the
Yorkshire moors the joy had gone out of her life.
Her companions during childhood had been the two
not very prepossessing servants and the still less
attractive gardener and out-door man. With her
uncle Simon she had nothing in common. Even
at the time of her arrival he was elderly and morose,
and every day he seemed to grow more self-centred
and less approachable.</p>

<p>After some years a break had come in her life;
she had been sent to a boarding school. But she
had not been happy there, so that when she was
“finished” she was almost glad to return to the
dullness and loneliness of Starvel.</p>

<p>There she had found changes. Her uncle Simon
was now an invalid, querulous and solitary, and
living only for the accumulation of money. His
passion took the form of collecting actual coins and
notes and hoarding them in his safe. He made no
attempt to cultivate the friendship of his niece, and
had it not been that he required her to read to him
once a day, she would have seen him but seldom.</p>

<p>At this time also the two old women servants and
the gardener had gone, and their places had been
taken by a comparatively young married couple
called Roper. Though more efficient than their
predecessors, Ruth did not take to either of the
newcomers, with the result that the fourteen months
which had passed since her return from school were
lonelier than ever.</p>

<p>Had it not been that Ruth had developed an
interest in flowers and gardening, she would have
found herself hard put to it to fill her life.
Gardening and her friendship with a semi-invalid
entomologist who lived close by, together with
occasional excursions to the neighbouring market
town of Thirsby, were the only distractions she
could count on.</p>

<p>But recently another factor had come into her
life. She had met on a number of occasions a
young man named Pierce Whymper, the junior
assistant of an ecclesiastical architect in Leeds.
Whymper was acting as clerk of works during some
renovations to the parish church at Thirsby, and
when Ruth had gone with one or two of the local
ladies to inspect the work he had been particularly
attentive. He had begged her to come again to
see how the job progressed, and she had done so
on more than one occasion. Then one day she
had met him walking near Starvel, and she had
invited him to come in and have tea. This visit had
been followed by others and they had made
excursions together on the moor. Though no word
of love had been spoken during any of these
interviews, she knew that he was attracted to her, and
though she would hardly admit it to herself, she
knew also that she would marry him if he should
ask her.</p>

<p>Such was the general condition of affairs in the
old house of Starvel on this gloomy September
afternoon, an afternoon which was to be
remembered by Ruth as the end of her old life and the
prelude to a new existence in a different world.</p>

<p>As she was standing, staring mournfully out of
the window, the attendant, Roper, entered the
room. She did not know then, though she realised
it afterwards, that the message he was bringing her
was to be the herald of a series of terrible and tragic
happenings, so dark and sinister and awful that had
she foreseen them she might well have cried out in
horror and dismay. But she did not foresee them,
and she turned with her instinctive courtesy to hear
what the man had to say.</p>

<p>The message, though almost unprecedented, was
in itself the reverse of alarming. Roper explained
that Mr. Averill had instructed him to hand this
note, which he had received in a letter to himself,
to Miss Ruth, and to say that he hoped Miss Ruth
would accept the invitation it contained. Further,
that as there would be expenses in connection with
the visit, he wished Miss Ruth to have the ten
pounds enclosed in this other envelope. She could
go in to Thirsby in the morning, get any little thing
she might want, and go on to York in the afternoon.</p>

<p>With rapidly beating heart Ruth unfolded the
dog-eared corner of the note, which was addressed
simply “Ruth,” and read as follows:—</p>

<blockquote><div>

<p class="address">“Oakdene,” Ashton Drive,</p>
<p class="dateline">York. <i>September</i> 10<i>th</i>.</p>

<p>“<span class="name">My Dear Ruth,</span>—I hope you will allow me to
address you in this way, as your father and I were
old friends. I nursed you when you were a baby,
and though we have not met for many years, I do
not feel that you are a stranger.</p>

<p>“This is to ask if you will come and stay here
for a few days and meet my daughters Gwen and
Hilda. I do hope you can.</p>

<p>“Our autumn flower show opens on Wednesday,
and the roses are always worth seeing. I am sure
you would enjoy it, so try to reach here on Tuesday
afternoon and you will be in time to go there with
us.</p>

<p class="valediction">“Yours very sincerely,</p>
<p class="signature">“<span class="name">Helen Palmer-Gore</span>.”</p>

</div></blockquote>

<p>Ruth could scarcely believe her eyes as she read
this friendly letter. Mrs. Palmer-Gore she dimly
remembered as a large, kindly, fussily-mannered
woman, whom she had liked in spite of her trick of
giving unpleasantly moist kisses. But she had never
visited her, or ever been to York, and the prospect
thrilled her.</p>

<p>But unexpected as the invitation was, it was as
nothing compared to her uncle’s attitude towards it.
That he should have given her permission to go was
surprising enough, but that he should have sent her
ten pounds for her expenses was an absolute miracle.
<em>Ten Pounds!</em> <em>What</em> a sum! Why, she had never
had the tenth part of it in her possession before!
And <em>what</em> she could buy with it! Visions of frocks,
shoes, hats and gloves began to float before her
imagination. Feeling as he did towards money, it
was good of her uncle Simon. She turned
impulsively to Roper.</p>

<p>“Oh, how kind of uncle,” she exclaimed. “I must
go up and thank him.”</p>

<p>Roper shook his head.</p>

<p>“Well, miss, I shouldn’t if I were you,” he
advised in his pleasant Scotch voice. He came from
somewhere in Fife. “The master’s not so well,
as you know, and he particularly said he didn’t want
to be disturbed. I’d wait and see him in the
morning before you go. You will go, I suppose?”</p>

<p>“Of course I shall go, Roper.” She hesitated,
undecided. “Well, perhaps if he said that, I’d
better see him in the morning, as you suggest.”</p>

<p>“Very good, miss. Then I’d best arrange for a
car to take you in to Thirsby in the morning?
About ten, maybe?”</p>

<p>“Thank you. Yes, about ten will do. And you
might send a telegram to York which I will write
for you.”</p>

<p>The man bowed and withdrew, and Ruth gave
herself up to glorious dreams of the next few days:
not so much of visiting the Palmer-Gores and York,
but of getting away from Starvel. Yes, she
admitted it to herself at last. It was to get away
from Starvel that she really welcomed the
invitation. While there had been no chance of quitting
it, she had not realised how terribly bitter was her
hatred of the place. And not the place only, but
of every one in it. She hated her uncle—in spite of
the ten pounds. She hated Roper with his sleek
civility, and most of all she hated Mrs. Roper, who
always treated her with a veiled insolence, as if
silently taunting her because of her dependent
position. Oh, how splendid it would be to get away
from the place and everything connected with it,
even for a few days! And she determined she would
use the opportunity of this visit to find out what her
chances would be of getting some job by means of
which she could support herself, so that she might
never be forced to return to Starvel or see any of its
inhabitants again.</p>

<p>That night she could scarcely sleep from
excitement, and next morning she was ready with her
shabby little suitcase long before the time at which
the car was to arrive.</p>

<p>She was somewhat uneasy about her uncle’s
condition. For several days he had been ailing, and
when she had gone in to say good-bye to him before
leaving she had thought him looking very ill. He
was asleep, but breathing heavily, and there was
something in his appearance which vaguely
disquieted her.</p>

<p>“I don’t think he’s at all well,” she said to Roper
when she came down. “I believe he should have the
doctor.”</p>

<p>“I was of the same opinion, miss, and I took the
liberty of calling at Dr. Philpot’s when I went in to
order your car. But the doctor’s ill. He’s got
influenza and is confined to bed. I thought of going
on to Dr. Emerson, and then I thought if it’s only
influenza that’s wrong with Dr. Philpot we might
just as well wait. He’ll likely be about again in a
day or two.”</p>

<p>Dr. Philpot was Mr. Averill’s usual attendant.
He was a youngish man who had come to the place
some three or four years earlier, and who had
already built up a reputation for care and skill. The
other practitioner, Dr. Emerson, was old and past
his work, and had retired in all but name.</p>

<p>Ruth paused in some perplexity.</p>

<p>“That’s very unfortunate. But I think you are
right that if it’s only a matter of a day or two we
should wait for Dr. Philpot. I hadn’t heard he
was ill.”</p>

<p>“Neither had I, miss. He was all right on
Thursday, for he was out that day to see Mr. Giles.”</p>

<p>“So I understand. How is Mr. Giles to-day?”</p>

<p>“I haven’t heard this morning, miss, but last night
he was far from well. Mrs. Roper is just going up
to see if there is anything wanted.”</p>

<p>“I’ll go round to see him on my way to Thirsby,”
Ruth decided. “Can I give Mrs. Roper a lift?”</p>

<p>“Thank you, miss, it would be a convenience. I’ll
tell her.”</p>

<p>Markham Giles, the entomologist, was their
nearest neighbour. He was the son of an old friend of
Mr. Averill’s and lived alone in a little cottage half
a mile away across the moor. He was a pathetic
instance of the wreckage left by the War. Never
physically strong, he had been rejected for the
earlier army drafts, but when the struggle had
dragged out and the standard for recruitment had
been lowered he had again volunteered and had got
through. He had served in Flanders, had been
badly gassed and wounded, and six months later
had left the hospitals the shadow of his former self.
Being alone in the world and penniless save for
his pension, he had headed north to his father’s old
friend. A small cottage belonging to Starvel being
then vacant, Mr. Averill had offered it to him at
a nominal rent. There he had since lived, occupying
his time by keeping bees and by studying the insect
life of the moor. On this subject he had become
somewhat of an authority, and had written articles
which had attracted attention in entomological
circles. He and Ruth were good friends and she had
helped in the capture and arrangement of his
specimens.</p>

<p>Some days previously he had developed influenza,
and though he did not seem seriously ill, he was not
shaking it off. Mrs. Roper had been kind in looking
after him and Ruth also had done what she could.</p>

<p>Ten minutes later the two women arrived at the
tiny cottage which lay just outside the lip of Starvel
Hollow, the big saucer-shaped depression in the
moor in the centre of which stood Simon Averill’s
house. Markham Giles looked worse than when
Ruth had last seen him. He lay with half-closed
eyes and seemed too dull and listless to more than
notice his visitors. But he feebly thanked them for
coming and said he was quite comfortable and
wanted nothing.</p>

<p>“If he’s not better by to-morrow, I think you
should send for Dr. Emerson,” Ruth declared as she
returned to her car.</p>

<p>“I think so, too, miss. Very good, I’ll arrange
it. And if he seems bad to-night either John or I
will come over and sit with him. I don’t like his
look this morning somehow.”</p>

<p>“It’s very good of you, Mrs. Roper. But I expect
he’ll be all right.”</p>

<p>“I hope so, miss. Good-morning, miss.”</p>

<p>Ruth’s mind was troubled as she turned away.
She had always been intensely sorry for Markham
Giles, and now she hated leaving him lying there
alone. But there was nothing that she could do,
and with a half sigh she re-entered her vehicle and
was driven into Thirsby.</p>

<p>There she spent the morning shopping, packing
her purchases in her suitcase. This was followed
by a frugal meal at the local tea shop, and then
arose the question of how she should spend the hour
remaining until train time.</p>

<p>She left her suitcase at the tea shop, and sallied
forth. Involuntarily her steps turned towards the
church, though she assured herself that under no
circumstances would she enter the building. There
could, however, be no objection to walking past the
gate.</p>

<p>What she would have done eventually if left to
herself will never be known, as Fate intervened and
arranged her visit for her. Turning a corner she
all but ran into Mrs. Oxley, the wife of one of the
local solicitors. Mr. Oxley had charge of all Simon
Averill’s business, and on his occasional visits to
Starvel he had made a point of asking for Ruth and
chatting to her in his pleasant cheery way. Mrs.
Oxley she had known for years, and had experienced
many kindnesses at her hands.</p>

<p>They stopped to talk and Mrs. Oxley heard of the
visit to York with interest and sympathy.</p>

<p>“Well,” she said, “if you’re not doing anything
until half-past three, come with me to the church.
Boyd, the sexton, promised to send me some of the
old flags for the rock garden, and I want to know
when I’m likely to get them.”</p>

<p>There was nothing for it but to go, and whether
Mrs. Oxley had any suspicion of how matters stood,
or whether she was genuinely anxious about her
paving-stones, Ruth was left alone to talk to
Whymper for a good ten minutes. And the young man
did not fail to improve the occasion. It appeared
that he had to go to the station to make inquiries
about a consignment of cement, so it was natural
that he should leave the church with the ladies. Mrs.
Oxley, it then turned out, had business in the
opposite direction and to her great regret was unable to
accompany the others. So the task of seeing Miss
Averill off fell to Mr. Whymper.</p>

<p>It was with shining eyes and heightened colour
that, half an hour later, Ruth Averill sat in the
corner of a third-class compartment, while the train
moved out of Thirsby. That Whymper loved her
she was now positive. It was true that he had not
actually spoken of love, but his every word and look
proclaimed his feelings. He had, moreover,
insisted on telling her about his family and his position
and prospects—a good sign. As to her own
feelings, she was no longer in any doubt whatever. She
loved him, and in loving him the gray clouds that
pressed down upon her life seemed to break and the
rosy light of hope to pour in through the rift.</p>

<p>She duly reached York and found Mrs. Palmer-Gore
waiting for her on the platform. With her
for two days she spent a pleasant holiday, enjoying
the unwonted good-fellowship. The visit was to
have lasted a week, but on the afternoon of the
second day, there fell the first of the several blows
that she was to experience, and her stay was brought
to an abrupt termination.</p>

<p>They had just sat down to lunch when a telegram
was handed to her. It was the first she had ever
received. Excited and a trifle embarrassed, she
hesitated to open it.</p>

<p>But when in answer to Mrs. Palmer-Gore’s
kindly: “Read it, dear. Don’t mind us,” she learned
its contents, all thought of herself was swept from
her mind.</p>

<p>It was signed “Oxley,” though whether it came
from the solicitor or his wife she could not tell. It
read: “Terrible accident at Starvel. Your uncle
injured. Return Thirsby and stay night with us.”</p>

<p>It was characteristic of the girl that her thoughts
and feelings were all for old Simon Averill. Was
the poor old man badly injured? Was he suffering?
Could she do anything to help him? It was kind of
the Oxleys to ask her to stay the night, but of course
she could not do so. She must go out to Starvel
and help with the nursing. Not one thought of the
possible effect on herself of the disaster entered
her mind. That the old man might die of his
injuries and that she might be his heir never occurred
to her. Nor did she repine at the cutting short of
her first real and altogether wonderful holiday.</p>

<p>By Mrs. Palmer-Gore’s advice she wired to the
Oxleys that she would be with them at 5.40, and
after a hurried lunch she found herself once more
in the train. During the journey she had time to
ponder over her news. A “terrible accident” at
Starvel! What <em>could</em> have happened? It must
surely be bad or that ominous word “terrible” would
not have been used. She began to invent
possibilities. Had her uncle taken the wrong medicine,
perhaps some awful burning stuff that would hurt
him horribly? Or had he fallen downstairs or into
the fire? Or cut himself and been unable to
summon help?</p>

<p>She gave full rein to her imagination, but when
she learned the truth she found it vastly more
terrible than anything she had thought of. The Oxleys
met her at the station, and having driven her to
their home, broke the news.</p>

<p>It seemed that when about eleven o’clock that
morning the baker was approaching Starvel to make
his customary Thursday call, he had noticed a faint
pall of smoke hanging in the sky above the hollow.
On crossing the shoulder he had glanced down as
usual into the curious circular dell, and had instantly
been overwhelmed with incredulous amazement.
There were the trees, the thin, stunted pines which
surrounded the old house, but—<em>the house was gone!</em>
The long line of slated roof which had stood out
above the trees had absolutely vanished. No trace
remained. At first sight the man thought that the
entire building had disappeared, but a closer
approach revealed blackened windowless walls
surrounding a still smouldering interior, all that
remained of the old place.</p>

<p>No sign of life appeared about the ruins, and the
horror-stricken man was forced to the conclusion
that all three occupants had lost their lives in the
flames.</p>

<p>He drove hurriedly into Thirsby and gave the
alarm, and soon Sergeant Kent of the local police
force with some of his men, Dr. Emerson, Mr.
Oxley and a number of others were hastening to the
scene. They found matters as the baker had
described, the smouldering ruins standing gaunt and
sinister at the bottom of the dell, lonely and
deserted, hidden from the surrounding country by the
rim of the strange natural Hollow.</p>

<p>The fire had evidently raged with extraordinary
fury. With the exception of an outhouse separate
from the main building not a scrap of anything
inflammable remained. Floors, roof, staircase,
window sashes, all were gone. And in that glowing
mass of red-hot débris within the blackened and
twisted walls lay, almost certainly, the bodies of
Simon Averill, and of John and Flora Roper.</p>

<p>Anxious that Ruth should not have to learn the
terrible news from the papers, Mr. Oxley had
returned to Thirsby and sent his wire. He had thought
it best to make this only a preparation, intending
that the full story should be broken more gently on
the girl’s arrival.</p>

<p>Ruth was terribly shocked and upset. It was the
first time, since reaching years of discretion, that
she had been brought in contact with tragedy and
death, and she was appalled by its horror. She
begged to be allowed to go out to Starvel, but
neither of the Oxleys would hear of it, pointing out
that a visit would only harrow her feelings, and
that she could do nothing there to help.</p>

<p>As the long evening dragged away she found
herself hoping against hope that Whymper would call.
But there was no sign of him and she supposed he
had not heard of her return.</p>

<p>Sergeant Kent, however, had heard of it, and
about eight o’clock he called and asked to see her.
He was a tall, rather brusque man, though in
Oxley’s presence he was polite enough. He questioned
her as to the household and its personnel, but she
had nothing to tell him which could throw any light
on the tragedy.</p>

<p>The next day it was found possible to attempt
some research work among the ruins, and by ten
o’clock a number of men were engaged in removing
the cooler portions of the débris. Ruth insisted
that she must see the place for herself, and the
Oxleys, not liking to let her go alone, drove her out
in their car. But the terrible picture which met her
eyes and the thought of what lay below the sinister
mound where the men were working made her feel
almost sick with horror. Her feelings too, had
changed. Gone was her hatred of the place, and
particularly of the three poor people who had met
with such an appalling fate. She felt she had been
wicked to hate them. Her uncle had been a recluse
and fond of money no doubt. But in his own way
he had always been kind to her. He had opened his
door to her when she was a homeless child, and had
since supported her without grudging the money
she must have cost him. And he had been
ill—continuously ill; and when people are ill they cannot
help being depressed and a little trying to others.
And the Ropers, had she not misjudged them also?
In their own way, they, too, had always been kind
to her. For the first time, Ruth saw that the lives
of the couple must have been as dull and gray as
her own. Though their jobs were underpaid, and
rather thankless, they had not complained. And
she, Ruth, had never shown an appreciation of their
services. She saw now that she had really had no
reason at all for hating them, and when she thought
of their terrible death, her tears flowed. In silence
she allowed Mrs. Oxley to lead her back to the car
and drive her to Thirsby.</p>

<p>On their way to the little town the second blow
fell on the young girl, and coming so quickly on the
first, left her weak and trembling. As they mounted
the rim of the Hollow they saw a funeral
approaching along a converging road. It was a sorry
procession; only the hearse, and the vicar and Dr. Emerson
in the former’s car. As the two ladies drew up for
it to pass, the vicar also stopped, and he and the
doctor came over to express their sympathy with
Ruth.</p>

<p>“You will be sorry for poor Mr. Giles, also, Miss
Ruth,” the vicar went on. “I understood you were
kind enough to help him in his scientific researches.”</p>

<p>Ruth stared at him in horror.</p>

<p>“You don’t mean,” she stammered, “that Mr.
Giles is—is dead?”</p>

<p>“He died on Tuesday, I’m sorry to say. After
a short illness he passed away in his sleep. He had
no suffering. But, only thirty-six! Truly, another
tragedy of the War.”</p>

<p>Ruth was stunned. Markham Giles, also! To
lose at one blow all four persons whom she had
known best—the only four persons in the world she
had known at all well! It was too much.</p>

<p>She pulled herself together, however, and insisted
on following her friend’s body to its last
resting-place, but when she reached the Oxleys’ house she
broke down altogether. Mrs. Oxley put her to bed
and at last she sobbed herself to sleep.</p>

<p>That evening the charred remains of three human
bodies were found within the tragic walls of Starvel.</p>

</div>

<div class="chapter" id="ch02">

<h2>CHAPTER TWO: The Inquest</h2>

<p>When Ruth Averill awoke next morning she
found that the overwhelming sense of sick horror
which had weighed her down on the previous
evening had lightened. She had been worn out in body
from the shock and the nervous strain, but sleep had
restored her physical well-being, and her mind
reacted to her body. She was young, she was in
perfect health, and—she was in love.</p>

<p>While her feelings of compassion for the trio who
had lost their lives in so terrible a way were in no
whit lessened, she would have been less than human
had she not begun to look upon the tragedy as it
affected herself. And here at once was something
exciting and a little terrifying. What would
happen to her now? She had hated her life at Starvel;
would the life that lay before her be better or
worse? Scarcely worse, she thought; any change
must surely be for the better. She had intended
while at York to make some inquiries about earning
her own living so that she might leave Starvel. Now
this was no longer a matter of choice; in some way
she must learn to support herself. Vaguely she
wondered if any of her uncle’s money would come
to her. But she dismissed the idea as too good to
be true. Perhaps with luck there might be enough
to keep her until she could train for some post, but
even about this she could not be certain. However,
Mr. Oxley was kind and clever. She need not worry
overmuch. He would advise her.</p>

<p>While making up her mind to rise and face what
the day might bring forth, Ruth was greatly
comforted by a visit from Mrs. Oxley. That lady
presently knocked to inquire if her charge were
awake, and she was so kind and understanding and
kissed her in such a motherly way that Ruth felt a
glow of warmth in her heart. Mrs. Oxley brought
with her a tiny tray with the daintiest little tea
service and the thinnest of bread and butter, and
while Ruth enjoyed this unheard-of luxury the elder
woman sat on the bed and proceeded to feed the
girl’s mind with healing news. She mentioned,
casually and yet with such a wealth of detail, that Mr.
Whymper had called on the previous evening to
inquire for Miss Averill. With really praiseworthy
ingenuity she spun out the subject for nearly ten
minutes, then she went on to tell something of
almost—though of course not quite—equal
importance. Mr. Oxley had wished her to say, in the
strictest confidence—no one at this stage was
supposed to know anything about it—but in order to
relieve Ruth’s mind, he thought he might tell
her—that she was not to worry as to her future. He had
drawn up old Mr. Averill’s will and there would be
some money. Mr. Oxley had not said how much,
but Mrs. Oxley was sure there would be enough.
At all events Ruth was not to worry. And now,
breakfast would be ready in half an hour and there
was plenty of hot water in the bathroom.</p>

<p>During the morning Ruth went down into the
little town and engaged in the melancholy business
of buying mourning. Mr. Oxley had lent her twenty
pounds, explaining that she could repay him when
she got her own money. This prospect of money
coming to her made Ruth feel excited and
important, and she could not refrain from
daydreaming about all the wonderful things she would do
when she received it. It was well for her indeed
that she had something so absorbing to take her
mind off the ghastliness of the tragedy which
surrounded her. In fact, if only Pierce Whymper had
come to see her again, she would have been really
happy. But, as she afterwards learned, the young
architect was out of town on business all that
morning.</p>

<p>During Sergeant Kent’s call on the evening after
the tragedy he had warned Ruth that she would be
required to give evidence at the inquest. Now he
came round to say that this was to be held in the
courthouse at three o’clock that afternoon, and that
she must be sure to be there in good time. The girl
was naturally nervous at the prospect of giving
evidence, which she had always heard was a terrible
ordeal. But Mrs. Oxley reassured her in her kindly
way, explaining that she had nothing to do but
answer the questions she was asked, and promising
that Mr. Oxley would see that nothing untoward
befell her.</p>

<p>Shortly before the hour, therefore, the little party
approached the courthouse. The building was
already crowded, but Mr. Oxley’s position as the
leading solicitor of the town and Ruth’s as one of
the most important witnesses procured them an
immediate entrance and places on the seats usually
reserved for counsel. As Ruth looked round the
small old-fashioned building she saw many familiar
faces. There, surrounded by policemen and looking
weighed down with importance and responsibility,
was Sergeant Kent. He was moving restlessly
about, whispering to various persons and consulting
at times a sheaf of papers he held in his hand. Some
of the policemen she recognised also. There was
the young smiling one with the light blue eyes whom
she had met so many times when shopping in the
town, and his companion with the long drooping
nose and the hollow cheeks. In the seat behind was
Mr. Snelgrove, the butcher, and Mr. Pullar, of the
shoe shop. That tall very thin man with the little
moustache and the bald head was Mr. Tarkington,
the bank manager, and the slight, medium-sized man
beside him was Mr. Bloxham, the clerk whom he
used to send out to Starvel with Mr. Averill’s
money. The venerable-looking old gentleman with
the short white beard who was just pushing to the
front was Dr. Emerson. And there—how could
she have failed to see him before?—there, at the
back of the court, was Pierce Whymper. He looked
anxious and troubled, and though when she caught
his eye and smiled, he smiled back, there was a
something of embarrassment or reserve in his manner
that seemed to her strange and disquieting. And
just beside him—but a sudden shuffle took place
about her, and looking in front of her, she saw that
a stout thick-set man with a square face and a
walrus moustache had entered from some invisible
side door and was taking his seat in the judge’s
chair.</p>

<p>“Dr. Lonsdale, the coroner,” Mr. Oxley
whispered, and Ruth nodded. She was surprised to find
that the affair began so tamely. She had expected
an elaborate and picturesque ritual, but nothing of
the kind took place. The coroner opened his bag,
and taking out some papers, began to turn them
over. Other persons sitting round the table before
her also took out papers and shuffled them, while
Sergeant Kent, turning round, shouted out “Robert
Judd!” so suddenly and loudly that Ruth jumped.
Some one at the back of the court answered “Here!”
and was promptly ordered to come forward and
enter the jury box. Other names were called—to
some of which there was no reply—until all the
places in the box were occupied. Then all stood
up and stared vacantly at Kent while he murmured
something about “justly try and true deliverance
make,” after which every one sat down again.</p>

<p>“Have the jury viewed the remains?” asked the
coroner, and Kent, answering, “They’re going to
do it now, sir,” shepherded his charges out of the
box and away through a door just behind it. Every
one began conversing in low tones except the
coroner, who kept on steadily writing. Presently the
jury trooped in again and the proceedings began
in real earnest.</p>

<p>“Call Peter Spence!” Sergeant Kent shouted.</p>

<p>“Peter Spence!” repeated two or three
policemen, and a stout redfaced man pushed to the front,
and entering the witness box, was sworn.</p>

<p>Spence told his story in great detail. In answer
to the sergeant’s questions he explained that he
drove a breadcart belonging to Messrs. Hinkston
of Thirsby, and that for over twelve years he had,
three times a week, delivered bread at Starvel. He
remembered the day before yesterday. On that day,
about eleven in the morning when he was
approaching Starvel to deliver bread, he had observed a cloud
of smoke in the sky. On crossing the lip of the
Hollow he happened to look down at the house.
He was amazed to notice that the roof, which
formerly showed up above the surrounding trees, had
totally disappeared. He drove on quickly to the
place, and then he saw that the house had been
burnt down. Only the walls were standing. There
was no one about. He hurried into Thirsby, and
reported the matter to Sergeant Kent.</p>

<p>Simple as these facts were, their recital was a
lengthy business. After each question a pause
ensued while the coroner wrote a précis of the man’s
reply. Finally Dr. Lonsdale, after vainly inviting
the jury to ask the witness any questions, read over
what he had written. Peter Spence, having agreed
that it was a correct transcript of his evidence, was
asked to sign the document, and then allowed to step
down.</p>

<p>The next witness was a lugubrious looking man in
gray tweeds. He deposed that his name was Abel
Hesketh, and that he was Town Officer of Thirsby.
He also acted as chief of the fire brigade. On the
Thursday in question he received a telephone
message from Sergeant Kent, informing him that Starvel
had been burnt down. He inquired if he should get
the brigade out, but the sergeant answered that it
would be of no use, the damage being already done.
Sergeant Kent asked him to go with him to see the
place. He did so, and he would describe what he
saw. The entire buildings at Starvel were gutted
except a detached outhouse at the opposite side of
the yard. He had never seen such complete
destruction. Nothing that could be burnt was left.
Between the walls the débris was still a red-hot
glowing mass. In answer to the coroner, he thought
it quite impossible to say either where or how the
fire had originated. There was no wind that night
and the outbreak, once started, would creep through
the entire building.</p>

<p>Hesketh went on to say that the very heavy rain
which fell on the following night had cooled down
the red-hot interior, enabling his men to search the
ruins. They had come on the charred remains of
three human beings. Yes, he could say just where
the remains were found. The house was in the
shape of the inverted letter “┓” with the shorter
wing pointing to the west and the longer to the
south. At the extremity of the shorter wing—in the
north-western corner—were two bodies. The third
body was about ten feet from the end of the
southern wing. All the bodies were unrecognisable, but
he assumed they were those of the three inmates
of the house.</p>

<p>After the bodies had been removed he continued
his investigations, but he found nothing of interest
except a safe, which was in the southern wing, not
far from the single body. It was locked, and he
had set it up on a pile of débris so that the expert
that he understood Sergeant Kent was getting to
open it should be able more conveniently to carry
out the work.</p>

<p>Sergeant Kent corroborated the evidence of the
last two witnesses in so far as their testimony
concerned himself, and added that an expert from
Hellifield had that morning opened the safe. In it he
had found £1952 in sovereigns and a mass of burnt
papers.</p>

<p>“It seems to me an extraordinary thing,” the
coroner remarked when he had noted these details,
“that a fire of such magnitude could take place
without being seen. I quite understand that the Hollow
is deep enough to hide the actual flames, but there
must have been a tremendous glare reflected from
the sky which would have been visible for miles
round. How do you account for that, sergeant, or
can you account for it?”</p>

<p>“As a matter of fact, sir, it was noticed by at
least three people, and I have one of them here in
case you would like to call him. But I agree with
you, sir, that it is very strange that it was not more
generally observed. All I can suggest is that it was
a clear night with a quarter moon, and there
wouldn’t, therefore, be such a glare as if it had
been quite dark or if there had been clouds to
reflect the glow. Then, as you know, sir, this is a
quiet district, and it would be only by chance that
any one would be awake or looking out at the time.”</p>

<p>“Who were the three who saw it?”</p>

<p>“First, sir, there was James Stokes, a tramp. He
was sleeping in one of Mr. Herbert Reid’s outhouses
at Low Tolworth, about a mile and a half to the
west across the moor. He said nothing about it at
the time because he thought it wasn’t his business
and he didn’t want his whereabouts inquired into.
But he mentioned it in Thirsby in the morning and it
came to my ears, though not before the baker had
reported. I have Stokes here, if you wish to call
him. Then, sir, it was seen by Mrs. Eliza Steele, a
labourer’s wife living just outside the town on the
Hellifield Road. Her husband was ill and she was
sitting up attending to him. She did nothing about
it because she was busy with her husband and the
glare looked far away. She said she thought those
nearer it would do all that was possible. The third
party, or rather parties, were the two Miss Lockes,
elderly ladies who live alone about a mile on the
road to Cold Pickerby. Miss Julia saw the glare
and awoke her sister Miss Elmina, but they thought
the same as Mrs. Steele, that they were not called on
to do anything, as they would only get to the town
to find that everyone knew about it and that the
brigade had gone out.”</p>

<p>“I can understand that attitude,” the coroner
admitted. “It is a pity, however, that no one noticed
it in time to give a warning, though indeed it is
doubtful whether a warning would have been of any
use. I will hear the man Stokes.”</p>

<p>But the tramp had little to say, and nothing which
threw any light on the subject of the inquiry. He
had seen a glow through the door of the outhouse
and had looked out. From the direction of Starvel
great masses of smoke were belching up, with a
bright flickering glare and occasional jets of fire.
The night was calm and even at the distance of a
mile and a half he could hear the roaring and
crackling of the flames. That was about four in the
morning.</p>

<p>Ruth’s feelings were harrowed by these recitals,
which seemed to bring home the tragedy to her in all
its grim starkness. But she had not time to dwell
on the terrible pictures, as after the tramp had
signed his deposition and stepped down from the
box, her own name was called.</p>

<p>With her heart beating rapidly she left her seat
and entered the little pulpit-like enclosure. There
she stood while the sergeant repeated a phrase about
truth, and then, having given her name, she was
told to sit down. The coroner bent towards her.</p>

<p>“I am sorry, Miss Averill,” he said kindly, “to
have to ask you to attend and give evidence in this
tragic inquiry, but I promise you I shall not keep
you longer than I can help. Now, sergeant.”</p>

<p>In spite of this reassuring beginning, Ruth soon
began to think Sergeant Kent’s questions would
never cease.</p>

<p>Half the things he asked seemed to have no
connection whatever with the tragedy. She stated that
she was the late Simon Averill’s niece, the daughter
of his brother Theodore, that she was aged twenty,
and that she had come to Starvel when she was four.
She told of her schooldays in Leeds, saying that it
was now over a year since she had returned to
Starvel and that she had lived there ever since.</p>

<p>Her uncle had recently been in very poor health.
She thought his heart was affected. At all events,
to save climbing the stairs he had had a room on the
first floor fitted up as a bed-sitting room. For the
last year he had not been downstairs and some days
he did not get up. Recently he had been
particularly feeble, and she told of his condition when she
saw him two mornings before the tragedy. Then
she described her visit to York, mentioning Mrs.
Palmer-Gore’s invitation and the episode of the ten
pounds.</p>

<p>There seemed no end to Sergeant Kent’s
inquisition. He switched over next to the subject of the
house and elicited the facts that her uncle’s and the
Ropers’ beds were situated in the extremities of the
southern and western wings respectively.</p>

<p>“You heard the last witness describe where the
bodies were found,” he went on. “Would I be
correct in saying that if Mr. Averill and the Ropers
had been in bed when the fire took place their bodies
would have been found in just those positions?”</p>

<p>Ruth assented, and then the sergeant asked how
the house was lighted. There was oil, Ruth told
him, oil for the lamps other than Mr. Averill’s
and for the cooker which was used sometimes
instead of the range. There was also petrol. Her
uncle’s sight was bad and he used a petrol lamp.
The oil and petrol were kept in a cellar. This
cellar was under the main building, and if a fire were
to start there, in her opinion the whole house would
become involved. The lamps were attended to by
Roper, who had always been most careful in
handling them.</p>

<p>“Now, Miss Averill,” the sergeant became more
impressive than ever, “I think you said that during
the last fourteen months, when you were living at
Starvel, Roper and his wife were in charge of the
house?”</p>

<p>“Yes, they were there when I came back from
school.”</p>

<p>“Now, tell me, during all that time have you
ever known either of them the worse for drink?”</p>

<p>“Oh, no,” Ruth answered, surprised at the
question. “No, never.”</p>

<p>“You have never even noticed the smell of drink
from either of them?” the sergeant persisted.</p>

<p>“No.” Ruth hesitated. “At least—that is—”</p>

<p>“Yes?” went on the sergeant encouragingly.</p>

<p>“Once or twice Roper has smelt of whisky, but
he was never the least bit the worse of it.”</p>

<p>“But you have smelt it. Was that recently?”</p>

<p>“Yes, but Roper explained about it. He said he
felt a cold coming on and had taken some whisky
in the hope of getting rid of it.”</p>

<p>“Quite so. And how long ago was that?”</p>

<p>“A couple of times within the last fortnight,
perhaps once or twice before that.” But to Ruth her
answer did not seem quite fair, and she added: “But
he was as sober as you and I are. I never saw him
the least bit drunk.”</p>

<p>“I follow you,” the sergeant answered, and began
to ask questions about Mrs. Roper. Here Ruth
could truthfully say that she had never even smelled
drink, and she insisted on giving each of the
deceased an excellent character.</p>

<p>The sergeant next attempted to draw from her an
opinion as to how the fire might have originated.
Did Mr. Averill read late in bed? Might he have
knocked over his petrol lamp? Could he have fallen
in the fire? Did he take a nightcap of whisky?
And so forth. But Ruth had no ideas on the
subject. Any accident might have happened, of course,
but she didn’t think any that he had suggested were
likely. As to her uncle taking drink, he was a strict
teetotaller.</p>

<p>This ended Ruth’s examination. None of the
jurors wished to ask her any questions, and after
her evidence had been read over to her and she had
signed it, she was allowed to return to her seat with
the Oxleys.</p>

<p>Dr. Emerson was the next witness. He deposed
that he had examined the remains disinterred from
the débris. It was, of course, quite impossible to
identify them, but so far as he could form an
opinion of the body found in the southern wing it was
that of an elderly, tall, slightly built man and the
others were those of a man and a woman of medium
height and middle age. These would correspond
to Mr. Averill and the Ropers respectively, and so
far as he was concerned he had no doubt whatever
that the bodies in question were theirs.</p>

<p>Questioned as to the conditions obtaining at
Starvel before the fire, Dr. Emerson said that for the
last four years he had not attended Mr. Averill.
At his advancing age he found it too much to visit
outlying patients, and Dr. Philpot had taken over
almost all of them.</p>

<p>“Is Dr. Philpot here?” the coroner asked.</p>

<p>“Dr. Philpot is suffering from influenza at
present,” Dr. Emerson returned, though it was to
Sergeant Kent that the question had been addressed.
“I saw him this morning. He wished to attend, but
I persuaded him not to run the risk. It would have
been most unwise. He had a temperature of over
101.”</p>

<p>“I’m sorry to hear he is laid up. But I don’t
suppose he could have helped us. I should have
liked to ask him about Mr. Averill’s condition and
so forth, but it doesn’t really matter.”</p>

<p>“Well,” Dr. Emerson returned, “I can tell you
a little about that, if I should be in order in
mentioning it. I attended him for some eight years,
during the last two of which he aged very
considerably, growing slowly and steadily weaker. Without
going into details I may say that he had an incurable
complaint which must eventually have killed him.
Four years ago he was already feeble, and since
then he can only have become gradually worse.”</p>

<p>“Thank you, Dr. Emerson, that was what I
wanted to know. Would you say that his condition
rendered him liable to sudden weakness during
which he might have dropped his lamp or had some
similar accident?”</p>

<p>“I should say so decidedly.”</p>

<p>A Miss Judith Carr was next called. She proved
to be a rather loudly-dressed young woman whom
Ruth had not seen before. She was pretty in a
coarse way, and entered the witness-box and took
her seat with evident self-confidence.</p>

<p>Her name, she admitted heartily, was Judith
Carr, and she was barmaid at the Thirsdale Arms,
the largest hotel in Thirsby. She knew Mr. Roper,
the attendant at Starvel. He occasionally called for
a drink, usually taking one or at most two small
whiskies. She remembered the evening of the fire.
That evening about seven o’clock Mr. Roper had
come into the bar. He seemed to have had some
drink, but was not drunk. He asked for a small
Scotch, and believing he was sober enough she had
given it to him. He had taken it quickly and gone
out.</p>

<p>The last witness was a young man with bright red
hair who answered to the name of George
Mellowes. He was, he said, a farmer living at
Ivybridge, a hamlet lying some miles beyond Starvel.
On the day before the tragedy he had been over in
Thirsby on business, and he had left the town in his
gig shortly after seven to drive home. He had not
passed beyond the lights of the town when he had
overtaken Mr. Roper, whom he knew. Roper was
staggering, and it was not difficult to see that he
was drunk. The deceased was by no means
incapable, but he had undoubtedly taken too much.
Mellowes had stopped and offered him a lift, and Roper
had thanked him and with some difficulty had
climbed into the gig. He had talked in a maudlin
way during the drive. Mellowes had gone a little
out of his way and had set the other down at the
gate of Starvel. Roper had opened the gate
without difficulty, and had set off towards the house,
walking fairly straight. Mellowes had then driven
home. That was close on to eight, and there was no
sign of a fire.</p>

<p>When Mellowes had signed his deposition and
returned to his seat, the coroner made a little speech
to the jury. He said that every one must feel
appalled at the terrible tragedy which had happened
so near to them all. The police had been unable
to find relatives of any of the deceased other than
Miss Averill, who had given evidence that day,
and he took that opportunity of conveying to her
their respectful sympathy in her loss. He would
remind the jury that their duty on this occasion was
threefold: first, to state the identity of the
deceased if they were reasonably convinced by the
evidence on this point; second, to find the cause of
death in each case, and third, to state whether, in
their opinion, blame attached to any person or
persons, and if so, to whom. He did not think their
task would be difficult. On neither of the first two
points was there any doubt. He had only one
observation to make with regard to the third point—the
fixing of responsibility for the catastrophe. It
had been shown that the manservant, John Roper,
had been to some extent under the influence of
drink on the evening in question. The suggestion,
of course, was that some careless act of Roper’s
might have caused the fire. Now, while he approved
the action of the police in bringing out this
matter—they could not have done anything else—he must
point out to the jury that there was no evidence
that Mr. Roper’s condition had had anything to do
with the fire. If anything, the evidence tended in
the opposite direction. The position of the remains
suggested that the three unfortunate people had
been burnt in their beds, and if this was so it seemed
to involve the presumption that they had been
suffocated by the smoke while asleep. If the jury
accepted this view they would see that it ruled out the
possibility of any accident with lamps, or by falling
in the fire or by igniting petrol or paraffin oil. The
argument was, of course, not conclusive, but he
thought it tended as he had said. In any case he
should be sorry that a slur should be cast on the
memory of Mr. Roper, to whose zeal and efficiency
different witnesses had testified, unless that slur were
really deserved. It was, of course, for the jury to
decide, but he suggested that they might find that
Simon Ralph Averill, John Roper and Flora Roper
had lost their lives in a fire at Starvel on the night
of the fifteenth of September, the cause of which
there was no evidence to show.</p>

<p>Without leaving the box the jury found as the
coroner directed, the verdict was entered on the
records and signed, and the inquest was over.</p>

</div>

<div class="chapter" id="ch03">

<h2>CHAPTER THREE: Mr. Tarkington Develops a Theory</h2>

<p>As Ruth emerged from the comparative gloom of
the courthouse into the bright September sunshine
her spirits seemed to rise. A reaction had set in
from the strain of the inquiry, with its continuous
suggestion of the hideous details of the tragedy.
Now with the ending of the inquest, it seemed to her
that the terrible affair was all but over. The final
episode, the funerals, would not be anything like
so harrowing. Not since the first hint of disaster
had come in the shape of Mr. Oxley’s telegram
to York had she felt so lighthearted and in love
with life. She seemed to have awakened from an
evil dream.</p>

<p>It was therefore no indication of heartlessness that
she should glance eagerly around as she and her
friends advanced from the shadow of the old
building into the little square. She was young and the
claims of the living were more to her than those of
the dead. And who will reproach her for the thrill
of pleasurable excitement which she experienced as
the sight she was hoping for met her eyes? There
was Pierce Whymper evidently waiting for a chance
of speaking to her. With a smile she invited him
over, and he came and joined her. At the same
moment Mr. Tarkington, the thin hawk-like bank
manager, whom she had seen in the courthouse,
approached and spoke to Mr. Oxley.</p>

<p>“Will you go on?” the latter said to his wife.
“I want to go round to the bank with Mr.
Tarkington. I’ll follow in a few minutes.”</p>

<p>Mrs. Oxley, Ruth and Whymper moved off in one
direction while Mr. Oxley and Mr. Tarkington
disappeared in the other. For a time the trio chatted
with animation, then Ruth grew gradually more
silent, leaving the burden of the conversation to the
others. She was in fact puzzled and a little hurt by
a subtle change which she felt rather than noticed in
Whymper’s manner. He seemed somehow different
from the last time she had seen him—that time in
another existence when she had left Thirsby for her
visit to York. Then he had been obviously eager
for her company, anxious to talk to her, even before
Mrs. Oxley making no secret of his admiration and
regard. But now, though he was just as polite as
ever, his manner was less spontaneous, indeed at
times she thought it almost embarrassed. It occurred
to her that possibly the change might be in herself,
and even when their ways parted at the turn to the
church she had not completely made up her mind. But
whatever the cause, a certain disappointment
remained, and when she went up to change for dinner
she had lost a good deal of the lightheartedness
she had felt on emerging from the courthouse.</p>

<p>Mr. Oxley, when he arrived shortly after, also
showed a change of manner. He was a kindly, jovial
man, fond of a joke and the sound of his own voice,
but during dinner he was strangely silent and wore
an expression of concern and disappointment. But
he did not offer any explanation until the meal was
over, and then he followed the ladies into the
drawing-room and unburdened his mind.</p>

<p>“I am awfully sorry, Miss Ruth,” he began
hesitatingly, “but I am afraid I have brought you some
more bad news. It’s about money,” he added
hurriedly as the girl turned a piteous glance towards
him. “I’ll tell you exactly what has happened. You
know, or perhaps you don’t, that in spite of the way
he lived, your uncle was a rich man. As his solicitor
I have known that for many a year, but I had no
idea of just how much he had. Tarkington knows I
was his solicitor and he was talking about it just now.
He tells me that Mr. Averill must have been worth
between thirty and forty thousand pounds when he
died. Of course one would naturally suppose that
the money was in securities of some kind, but here is
my terrible news. Tarkington assures me that it was
not, that practically the whole sum was in Mr.
Averill’s safe.”</p>

<p>“Oh, Arthur!” Mrs. Oxley burst out. “You can’t
mean that it’s gone.”</p>

<p>“I’m afraid I do,” her husband answered. “It’s
awful to think about, but there were only some five
hundred pounds in the bank. The rest was in Mr.
Averill’s safe in notes and gold. The nineteen
hundred odd pounds in gold are there all right, but the
whole of the paper money has been destroyed.”</p>

<p>“Oh, how perfectly dreadful! But surely it can
be replaced? Surely something can be done by the
bank?”</p>

<p>Mr. Oxley shook his head.</p>

<p>“Nothing, I’m afraid. I talked it over with
Tarkington. The money is a total loss.”</p>

<p>Mrs. Oxley took Ruth into her arms.</p>

<p>“You poor child,” she commiserated. “I just
can’t tell you how sorry I am.”</p>

<p>But Ruth took the news coolly.</p>

<p>“Dear Mrs. Oxley,” she answered. “How kind
you are! But indeed I look upon this as a
comparatively little thing. I shall have far, far more
than I ever expected. I want to get some work, and
I shall have plenty to support me while I am training
and perhaps even a little after that. I am more
than content.”</p>

<p>Mrs. Oxley kissed her and commended her spirit,
though she felt the girl’s attitude was due more to
her unworldliness and ignorance of life than to
courage under disappointment. She wished to change
the subject, but Ruth asked to have her position
made clear to her and begged the others’ advice as
to her future. The Oxleys, delighted by her
common sense, willingly agreed to discuss the situation,
and after a long talk a proposal of Mr. Oxley’s was
provisionally agreed to.</p>

<p>It appeared that, assuming the old man’s money
had really been lost, Ruth’s capital would amount to
about £2400. Of this Mr. Oxley was to invest all
but £100, so as to bring Ruth about £130 per annum.
The remaining £100 was to be spent in taking a
secretarial course at one of the London training
colleges. With the backing of the £130 a year and
what she could earn for herself she ought, Mr.
Oxley believed, to be quite comfortably off. “But
you must,” Mr. Oxley went on, “stay here for as
long as you like, until you have rested and got over
the shock of this terrible affair.”</p>

<p>Mrs. Oxley warmly seconded this invitation, and
Ruth thankfully accepted it. It was true that she
was anxious to start work as soon as possible, and
life in London and the undergoing of the course of
training appeared to her as a glorious and thrilling
adventure. But even more anxious still was she to
meet Pierce Whymper and find out if there really
was a change in his feelings towards her. At the
time she had imagined that there was, but now she
thought that perhaps she had been mistaken and that
after the inquest he had simply been suffering from
a headache or some other trifling indisposition.
That he loved her she had not the slightest doubt,
and she could not bring herself to go away until
she was sure that no stupid, unnecessary
misunderstanding should have been allowed to come
between them.</p>

<p>Two days later she met him in the main street of
the little town. She stopped to chat and he turned
about and walked with her, and presently they had
tea at the local confectioner’s. But the interview
left her more puzzled than ever. Her belief that
Whymper loved her was confirmed beyond any doubt
by his manner, by the way he looked at her, by the
tones of his voice. But it was evident to her that
something was weighing on his mind which
prevented him making the proposal which, if the truth
must be admitted, she had been expecting. He gave
her the impression that he would speak if he could,
but that he was being held back by matters outside
his own control. And the same state of mind was
evident at their subsequent encounters, until Ruth’s
pride asserted itself and she grew colder and more
distant and their intimacy bade fair to come
gradually to an end.</p>

<p>She would have made a move for the metropolis
to begin her course of training had not Mrs. Oxley,
from what was probably a quite mistaken sense of
kindliness, suggested that a rest would be good for
her after the shocks she had experienced. On the
excuse of desiring the girl’s assistance in the
remodelling of her garden, which, owing to the difficulty of
obtaining labour, she was doing with her own hands,
the good lady invited her to stay on for a few weeks.
Ruth did not like to refuse, and she settled down
with the intention of remaining at Thirsby for at
least another month.</p>

<p>During the month the little town also settled
down again after its excitements and alarms, and
events once more began to pursue the even tenor of
their ways. The Starvel Hollow Tragedy ceased to
be a nine days’ wonder and was gradually banished
from the minds of the townspeople, until an event
happened which was to bring up the whole matter
again, and that in a peculiarly sensational and tragic
manner.</p>

<p>One morning in mid-October, some five weeks
after the fire, Mr. Tarkington called to see his
friend Oxley. The bank manager’s thin face wore a
serious and mystified expression, which at once
informed Mr. Oxley that something out of the
ordinary had occurred to disturb the other’s usual placid
calm.</p>

<p>“Good morning, Oxley,” said Mr. Tarkington in
his thin, measured tones. “Are you busy? I should
like a word with you.”</p>

<p>“Come along in, Tarkington,” the solicitor
rejoined heartily. “I’m not doing anything that can’t
wait. Sit you down, and have a spot.”</p>

<p>“Thanks, no, I’ll not drink, but I’ll take one of
these cigarettes if I may.” He drew the client’s big
leather covered chair nearer to Mr. Oxley and went
on: “A really extraordinary thing has just happened,
Oxley, and I thought I’d like to consult you about
it before taking any action—if I do take action.”</p>

<p>Mr. Oxley took a cigarette from the box from
which the other had helped himself.</p>

<p>“What’s up?” he asked, as he struck a match.</p>

<p>“It’s about that terrible Starvel affair, the fire,
you know. I begin to doubt if the matter is really
over, after all.”</p>

<p>“Not over? What on earth do you mean?”</p>

<p>“I’ll tell you, and it is really a most disturbing
thought. But before you can appreciate my news I
must explain to you how Averill carried on his bank
business. The poor fellow was a miser, as you know,
a miser of the most primitive kind. He loved money
for itself—just to handle and to look at and to
count. His safe was just packed full of money,
but of course you know all this, and that it was
through this dreadful weakness of his that poor
girl lost what should have come to her.”</p>

<p>“I know,” Mr. Oxley admitted.</p>

<p>“Averill’s income passed through the bank, and
that’s how I come to be aware of the figures. He
had between sixteen and seventeen hundred a year
and it came from three sources. First he had a
pension; he had held a good job with some company
in London. That amounted to about three hundred
pounds. Next he had an annuity which brought him
in £150. But the major portion came from land—land
on the outskirts of Leeds which had been built
over and which had become a very valuable
property. In this he had only a life interest—not that
that affects my story, though it explains why that
poor girl didn’t get it.”</p>

<p>“I know about that property,” Mr. Oxley
interjected. “I’ve had a deal to do with it one way and
another. The old man got it through his wife and
it went back to her family at his death.”</p>

<p>“I imagined it must be something of the kind.
Well, to continue. Averill’s income, as I said, was
passed through the bank. He received it all in
cheques or drafts and these he would endorse and
send to me for payment. He had a current account,
and my instructions were that when any cheque came
I was to pay in to this account until it stood at
something between £40 and £60—whatever would leave
an even £20 over—and I was to send the surplus
cash in £20 notes out to Starvel. Averill evidently
looked upon this as a sort of revenue account and
paid all his current expenses out of it. It never of
course rose above the £60 and seldom fell below
£20. To carry on my simile, any monies that were
over after raising the current account to £60 he
considered capital, and they went out to swell the
hoard in the safe at Starvel. In addition he kept
a sum of £500 on deposit receipt. I don’t know
exactly why he did so, but I presume it was as a sort
of nestegg in the event of his safe being burgled.
You follow me?”</p>

<p>“I follow you all right, but, by Jove! it was a
queer arrangement.”</p>

<p>“Everything the poor old man did was queer,
but, as you know, he was——” Mr. Tarkington
shook his head significantly. “However, to go on
with my story. These monies that were to be sent
out to Starvel I used to keep until they reached at
least a hundred, and then I used to send a clerk
out with the cash. The mission usually fell to
Bloxham—you know Bloxham, of course? Averill
liked him and asked me to send him when I could.
Bloxham has seen into the safe on two or three
occasions, and it is from him I know that it was
packed with notes as well as the gold.”</p>

<p>“I never can get over all that money being burnt,”
Mr. Oxley interjected. “It makes me sick to think
of even now. Such stupid, needless, wicked waste!”
Mr. Tarkington took no notice of this outburst.</p>

<p>“It happened that about a week before the
tragedy,” he went on in his precise manner, “a cheque
for £346 came in from the Leeds property. The
current account was then standing at £27, so I paid
£26 into it, raising it to £53, and sent Bloxham with
the balance, £320, out to Starvel. The money was
in sixteen twenties, the numbers of which were kept.
As I said, it was one of the old man’s peculiarities
that he liked his money in £20 notes. I suppose it
made it easier to hoard and count. Bloxham saw
Averill lock these notes away in his safe and brought
me the old man’s receipt.”</p>

<p>Mr. Tarkington paused to draw at his cigarette,
then continued:—</p>

<p>“In my report about the affair to our
headquarters in Throgmorton Avenue, I mentioned
among other things that these notes, giving the
numbers, had been destroyed in the fire. Well,
Oxley, what do you think has happened? I heard
from headquarters to-day and they tell me that
one of those notes has just been paid in!”</p>

<p>Mr. Oxley looked slightly bewildered.</p>

<p>“Well, what of it?” he demanded. “I don’t
follow. You reported that these notes had been
destroyed in the fire. But wasn’t that only a guess?
How did you actually know?”</p>

<p>“It was a guess, of course, and I didn’t actually
know,” Mr. Tarkington agreed. “But I think it was
a justifiable guess. I am acquainted with Averill’s
habits; he made no secret of them. Monies he paid
out he paid by cheque on the current account—everything
that one can think of went through it, even
the Ropers’ salaries. The cash sent out to Starvel
went into the hoard.”</p>

<p>“All of it didn’t.”</p>

<p>“Why, what do you mean?”</p>

<p>“The ten pounds to Ruth Averill didn’t.”</p>

<p>Mr. Tarkington seemed slightly taken aback.</p>

<p>“Well, that’s true,” he admitted slowly. “I
forgot about the ten pounds. I——”</p>

<p>“And there’s another twenty that didn’t,” Mr.
Oxley continued, “and that’s the twenty that turned
up in London. I don’t get your idea, Tarkington.
Just what is in your mind?”</p>

<p>Mr. Tarkington moved uneasily in the big
arm-chair.</p>

<p>“It seems far-fetched, I know, and I hardly like
putting it into words, but are you satisfied in your
own mind that business was all just as it appeared to
be?”</p>

<p>“What? The fire? How do you mean ‘as it
appeared to be’?”</p>

<p>“That it really was the accident we thought it.”</p>

<p>Mr. Oxley whistled.</p>

<p>“Oh, come now, Tarkington, that’s going a bit
far, isn’t it? Do you mean arson? What possible
grounds could you have for suggesting such a
thing?”</p>

<p>“I don’t exactly suggest it; I came to ask your
opinion about it. But what passed through my
mind was this: There have been several burglaries
lately—skilful burglaries, and, as you know, the
police have been completely at fault. Averill was
universally believed to be wealthy—the legend of
the safe was common property. Is it impossible
that some of these burglars might have decided to
make an attempt on Starvel? Remember the
situation was one of the loneliest in England. Assume
that they got in and that something unexpected
happened—that they were surprised by Roper, for
example. In the resulting disturbance Roper might
easily have been killed—possibly quite accidentally.
The intruders would then be fighting for their lives
as well as their fortunes. And in what better way
could they do it than to murder the other members
of the household, lay them on their beds and burn
the house down?”</p>

<p>Mr. Oxley did not reply. The idea was
chimerical, fantastic, absurd, and yet—it was certainly
possible. There <em>had</em> been a number of daring burglaries
within the last few months, which were generally
believed to be the work of one gang, and in no single
instance had the police been able to effect an arrest.
The belief in the old miser’s hoard <em>was</em> universal,
and from the point of view of the thief, Starvel
would be one of the easiest cribs to crack.
Moreover, on second thought Tarkington’s suggestion as
to the origin of the fire was not so fanciful, after all.
The safe containing the money was in Averill’s
bedroom, and the old man would have to be quieted in
some way before it could be opened. Roper’s
attention might easily have been attracted, and the
burglars, either by accident or in self-defence, might
have killed him. If so, the fire would be their
obvious way of safety. Yes, the thing was possible.
All the same there wasn’t a shred of evidence that
it had happened.</p>

<p>“But my dear fellow,” Oxley said at last, “that’s
all my eye! Very ingenious and all that, but you
haven’t a scrap of evidence for it. Why invent a
complicated, far-fetched explanation when you have
a simple one ready to hand? Sounds as if you had
been reading too many detective stories lately.”</p>

<p>Tarkington did not smile with his friend.</p>

<p>“You think it nonsense?” he asked earnestly.
“You think I needn’t tell the police about the note?”</p>

<p>“I don’t think you have any evidence: not
evidence to justify even a suspicion. You’ve no real
reason to suppose Averill did not hand that
twenty-pound note to some one from whom it passed to
the man who paid it in.”</p>

<p>“To whom, for example?”</p>

<p>“I don’t know. Neither of us knows what
visitors the old man might have had. But that doesn’t
prove he had none.”</p>

<p>Mr. Tarkington seemed far from satisfied. He
threw away his cigarette and took another from the
box, handling it delicately in his long, thin fingers.
He moved nervously in his chair and then said in a
low voice:—</p>

<p>“I suppose then, Oxley, I may take it that you
were quite satisfied about that business—I mean at
the time?”</p>

<p>Mr. Oxley looked at his friend in surprise.</p>

<p>“Good gracious, Tarkington, what bee have you
in your bonnet? Do you mean satisfied that the fire
was an accident and that those three poor people
were burned? Of course I was. It never occurred
to me to doubt it.”</p>

<p>The other seemed slightly relieved.</p>

<p>“I hope sincerely that you’re right,” he answered.
“But I may tell you that I wasn’t satisfied—neither
at the time nor yet since. That’s the reason that
when I heard about the note I came at once to
consult you. There’s a point which you and the coroner
and the police and every one concerned seem to have
overlooked.” He dropped his voice still further and
became very impressive. “What about the papers
that were burnt in the safe?”</p>

<p>Mr. Oxley was surprised at his friend’s
persistence.</p>

<p>“Well, what in Heaven’s name about them? For
the life of me I don’t see what you’re driving at.”</p>

<p>“Haven’t you ever been in Averill’s bedroom?”</p>

<p>“Yes. What of it?”</p>

<p>“Did you notice the safe?”</p>

<p>“Not particularly.”</p>

<p>“Well, I’ve both been there and noticed it.” He
bent forward, and his thin face seemed more hawk-like
than ever as he said impressively: “Oxley, that
safe was fireproof!”</p>

<p>Mr. Oxley started.</p>

<p>“Good Heavens, Tarkington! Are you sure of
that?” he queried sharply.</p>

<p>“Not absolutely,” the other replied. “It was
certainly my strong opinion and if I had been asked
before the fire I should have had no doubt. When I
heard the evidence at the inquest I concluded I had
made a mistake. But now this affair of the
twenty-pound note has reawakened all my suspicions.” He
paused, but as Oxley did not reply, continued:
“Perhaps I’ve got a bee in my bonnet as you said, but
I’m now wondering if Roper’s drunkenness doesn’t
support the theory? Could he not have been
enticed into Thirsby by some member of the gang and
treated so as to make him sleep well and not hear
what was going on? Remember, he was an
absolutely temperate man.”</p>

<p>“Not absolutely. Ruth had smelt drink on other
occasions.”</p>

<p>“You are right. Perhaps that is a trifle
far-fetched. But what do you think on the main point,
Oxley? Ought I to tell the police of my suspicions?”</p>

<p>Mr. Oxley rose and began to pace the room.
Then he went to the window and stood for some
moments looking out. Finally he returned to his
chair, and sat down again.</p>

<p>“I declare, Tarkington, I think you ought,” he
said slowly. “When you first made your—I might
perhaps say—your amazing suggestion I confess
I thought it merely grotesque. But if you are right
about the safe it certainly puts a different
complexion on the whole business. I take it it’s not too late
to ascertain? The safe is not too much damaged
to trace the maker and find out from him?”</p>

<p>“I should think the police could find the maker
quite easily.”</p>

<p>“Well, I think you should tell them. If you are
wrong no harm is done. If not, there are murderers
to be brought to justice and perhaps a fortune to be
recovered for Ruth.”</p>

<p>Mr. Tarkington rose.</p>

<p>“I agree with you, Oxley. I’ll go down to the
police station and tell Kent now.”</p>

<p>Mr. Oxley waved him back into his seat.</p>

<p>“Steady a moment,” he said. “Don’t be in such
a hurry.” He drew slowly at his cigarette while
the other sat down and waited expectantly.</p>

<p>“It seems to me,” went on Mr. Oxley, “that if
your suspicions are correct the thing should be kept
absolutely quiet. Nothing should be said or done
to put the criminals on their guard. Now Kent, you
know as well as I do, is just a bungling ass. My
suggestion is that we both take the afternoon off
and go see Valentine. I know him pretty well and
we could ring him up and make an appointment.”</p>

<p>“Valentine, the Chief Constable of the County?”</p>

<p>“Yes. He’s as cute as they’re made and he’ll do
the right thing.”</p>

<p>“Kent will never forgive us if we pass him over
like that.”</p>

<p>“Kent be hanged,” Mr. Oxley rejoined. “Can
you come in by the three-thirty?”</p>

<p>“Yes, I’ll manage it.”</p>

<p>“Right. Then I shall ring up Valentine.”</p>

<p>Five hours later the two friends found their way
into the strangers’ room of the Junior Services Club
in Leeds. There in a few moments Chief Constable
Valentine joined them, and soon they were settled
in a private room with whiskies and sodas at their
elbows and three of the excellent cigars the Chief
Constable favoured between their lips.</p>

<p>Mr. Tarkington propounded his theory in detail,
explaining that he was not sure enough of his facts
even to put forward a definite suspicion, but that he
and his friend Oxley agreed that Major Valentine
ought to know what was in his mind. The major
could then, if he thought fit, investigate the affair.</p>

<p>That the Chief Constable was impressed by the
statement was obvious. He listened with the
keenest interest, interjecting only an occasional “By
Jove!” as Mr. Tarkington made his points. Then
he thanked the two men for their information, and
promised to institute inquiries into the whole matter
without delay.</p>

<p>Two days later Mr. Tarkington received a letter
from Major Valentine saying that he thought it only
fair to inform him in the strictest confidence that
his belief that the safe was fireproof was well
founded, that he, the Chief Constable, strongly
suspected that more had taken place at Starvel on that
tragic night than had come out in the inquest, and
that as he considered the matter was rather outside
the local men’s capacity he had applied to Scotland
Yard for help in the investigation.</p>

<p>Mr. Tarkington, honouring the spirit rather than
the letter of the Chief Constable’s communication,
showed the note to Mr. Oxley, and the two men
sat over the former’s study fire until late that night,
discussing possible developments in the situation.</p>

</div>

<div class="chapter" id="ch04">

<h2>CHAPTER FOUR: Inspector French Goes North</h2>

<p>The stone which Messrs. Tarkington and Oxley
had thrown into the turbid waters of the British
Police Administration produced ripples which, like
other similar wave forms, spread slowly away from
their point of disturbance. One of these ripples,
penetrating into the grim fastness of the Criminal
Investigation Department of New Scotland Yard,
had the effect of ringing the bell of a telephone on
the desk of Detective Inspector Joseph French and
of causing that zealous and efficient officer, when
he had duly applied his ear to the instrument, to
leave his seat and proceed without loss of time to the
room of his immediate superior.</p>

<p>“Ah, French,” Chief Inspector Mitchell remarked
on his entry. “You should be about through with
that Kensington case, I fancy?”</p>

<p>“Just finished with it, sir,” French answered. “I
was putting the last of the papers in order when you
rang.”</p>

<p>“Well, you’ve had a lot of trouble with it and I
should have liked to have given you a breather. But
I’m afraid I can’t.”</p>

<p>“Something come in, sir?”</p>

<p>“A Yorkshire case. A place called Thirsby, up on
the moors not far, I understand, from Hellifield.
We’ve just had a request for a man and I can’t spare
any one else at present. So it’s you for it.”</p>

<p>“What is the case, sir?”</p>

<p>“Suspected murder, robbery and arson. The
people there appear to know very little about it and
the whole thing may turn out a mare’s nest. But
they’re darned mysterious about it—say they don’t
want it to be known that inquiries are being made
and suggest our man might go to the Thirsdale
Arms, the local hotel, in the guise of an angler or an
artist. So, if you’re a fisherman, French, now’s your
chance. You’re to call down at the police station
after dark, when Sergeant Kent, who’s in charge,
will give you the particulars.”</p>

<p>It was with mixed feelings that Inspector French
received his instructions. He delighted in travelling
and seeing new country, and the Yorkshire moors
comprised a district which he had often heard spoken
of enthusiastically, but had never visited. He was
by no means averse, moreover, to getting away from
town for a few days. It would be a welcome break
in the monotony of the long winter. But on the
other hand he loathed working away from
headquarters, bereft of his trained staff and of the
immediate backing of the huge machine of which he
was a cog. Local men, he conceded, were “right
enough,” but they hadn’t the knowledge, the
experience, the technique to be really helpful. And
then the “Yard” man in the country was usually
up against jealousies and a more or less veiled
obstruction, and to the worries of his case he had
to add the effort always to be tactful and to carry
his professed helpers with him.</p>

<p>However, none of these considerations affected
his course of action. He had his orders and he
must carry them out. He completed the filing of
the papers in the Kensington murder case, handed
over one or two other matters to his immediate
subordinate, and taking the large despatch case of
apparatus without which he never travelled, went
home to inform his wife of his change of plans
and pack a suitcase with his modest personal
requirements. Then he drove to St. Pancras and
caught the 12.15 restaurant car express to the north.</p>

<p>He was neither an artist nor an angler, and in
any case he considered the month of November was
scarcely a propitious time for worthies of either
type to be abroad. Therefore beyond dressing in
a more countrified style than he would have affected
in town, he attempted no disguise.</p>

<p>He changed at Hellifield and took the branch
line which wound up in a north-easterly direction
into the bleak hills and moors of western Yorkshire.
Six o’clock had just struck when he reached the
diminutive terminus of Thirsby.</p>

<p>A porter bearing the legend “Thirsdale Arms”
on his cap was at the station, and having surrendered
his baggage, French followed the man on foot down
the main street of the little town to a low, straggling,
old-fashioned building with half-timbered gables and
a real old swinging sign. Here a stout and cheery
proprietor gave him a somewhat voluble welcome,
and soon he was the temporary tenant of a low and
dark, but otherwise comfortable bedroom, while an
appetising odour of frying ham indicated that the
<i lang="fr">pièce de résistance</i> of his supper was in full
preparation.</p>

<p>He smoked a contemplative pipe in the bar, then
about half-past eight took his hat, and passing the
landlord at the door, gave him a cheerful good-night
and said he was going for a walk before bed.</p>

<p>While he did not intend to hide the fact of his
visit to Sergeant Kent, he had no wish to draw
attention thereto. He believed that in a small town
such things invariably get out, and to shroud them
in an air of mystery was only to invite publicity.
He therefore did not ask for a direction, but instead
strolled through the streets until he saw the police
station. Walking quietly but openly to the door,
he knocked. Two minutes later he was shaking
hands with the sergeant in the latter’s room.</p>

<p>“I’m sure I’m grateful to you for giving me the
chance of a change from London,” French began
in his pleasant, cheery way as he took the chair the
other pulled forward to the fire. “Will you join
me in a cigar, or do you object to smoking in the
office?”</p>

<p>The sergeant dourly helped himself from French’s
case, and gruffly admitted he was not above the use
of tobacco after office hours. French seemed in
no hurry to come to business, but chatted on about
his journey and his impressions of the country,
drawing the other out and deferring to his views in a
way that was nothing less than flattering. Before
ten minutes Kent had forgotten that his visitor was
an interloper sent to him over his head because his
superiors imagined that he was not good enough
for his own job, and was thinking that this stranger,
for a Londoner and a Yard man, was not as bad as
he might reasonably have been expected to be.
Under the soothing influences of flattery and good
tobacco, he gradually mellowed until, when French
at last decided the time had come, he was quite
willing to assist in any way in his power.</p>

<p>At French’s request he gave him a detailed
account of the tragedy together with a copy of the
depositions taken at the inquest, and then went on
to describe the bomb which Mr. Tarkington had
dropped when he mentioned his theories to Major
Valentine.</p>

<p>“Chief Constable, he told me to find out what
kind of safe it was in the house,” the sergeant went
on. “I knew, for I had seen it at the time, but I
went out again to make sure. It was made by
Carter &amp; Stephenson of Leeds, number—” he referred
to a well-thumbed notebook—“12,473. I went down
to Leeds, and saw the makers, and they said the
safe was twenty years old, but it was the best
fireproof safe of its day. I asked them would the notes
have burned up in it, and they said they wouldn’t
scarcely be browned, not no matter how fierce the
fire might be.”</p>

<p>“And what exactly was in the safe?”</p>

<p>“Just paper ashes and sovereigns. No whole
papers—all was burned to ashes.”</p>

<p>“Could I see those ashes? Are any of them
left?”</p>

<p>“I think so. We took out the sovereigns and
left the rest. The safe is lying in the rubbish where
we found it.”</p>

<p>French nodded, and for some minutes sat silent,
drawing slowly at his cigar while he turned over in
his mind the details he had learned. As he did
so the words of Chief Inspector Mitchell recurred
to him: “The people down there don’t appear to
know much about it, and the whole thing may turn
out to be a mare’s nest.” Now, having heard the
story, he wondered if this was not going to be
another of his chief’s amazing intuitions. It certainly
looked as like a mare’s nest as anything he had ever
handled. The only shred of evidence for foul play
was the safe-builders’ statement that their safe
would protect papers even in the fiercest fire, and
that statement left him cold. What else could the
builders say? They had sold the thing as
fireproof; how could they now admit they had made
a false claim? And this Tarkington’s theory of
the twenty-pound note was even less convincing.
There was no real reason to believe that Averill
had not handed it to his servant or to a visitor or
sent it away by post. In fact, the whole tale was
the thinnest he had listened to for many a day, and
he saw himself taking a return train to St. Pancras
before many hours had passed.</p>

<p>But he had been sent up to make an investigation,
and make an investigation he would. He rapidly
planned his line of action. The first thing to be
done was to get rid of this sergeant. He might be
right enough for his own job, but French felt that
he would be no help in an affair of this kind. Left
to himself, he would go out and examine the house
and then interview Tarkington. By that time he
should have learned enough at least to decide
whether or not to go on with the case. He turned
to Kent.</p>

<p>“Your statement, sergeant, has been so very complete
that I do not believe there is anything left for
me to ask you. But I think I should understand
the affair even better if I went and had a look at
the house. I’ll do that to-morrow. But, much as
I should like your company, I cannot ask you to
come with me. I entirely agree with and admire
your wisdom in keeping the affair secret, and if we
were seen together the cat would be out of the bag.
I will give out that I am a representative from the
insurance companies and I think no suspicion will
be aroused. If now you will kindly tell me where
the place lies, I think that’s all we can do in the
meantime.”</p>

<p>Five minutes later French turned from the main
street into the door of the Thirsdale Arms. The
landlord was standing in the hall and French stopped
in a leisurely way, as if ready for a chat. They
discussed the weather for some moments, and then
French asked the other if he would join him in a
drink.</p>

<p>It was not long before they were seated before
a glowing fire in the private bar, when French
proceeded to account for himself.</p>

<p>“I like your country,” he began, “what I’ve seen
of it. I’ve been a bit run down lately, and though
it’s not the time one would choose for a holiday,
my doctor thought I should take a week or two’s
rest. So, as I had a bit of business here I thought I
would kill two birds with one stone and do my
business and take my holiday at the same time. And
about that bit of business I thought that if you
would be good enough you could maybe give me
some help.”</p>

<p>The landlord, evidently curious, was anxious to
do anything in his power and French, following out
his theory that where absolute truth is inadmissible,
deviations therefrom should be as slight as possible,
went on confidentially:—</p>

<p>“It’s about a place called Starvel where there
was a big fire recently. You know all about it, of
course.” The landlord nodded eagerly. “Well,
I may tell you strictly between ourselves that I am
a detective. A fire unaccounted for is a very
disturbing matter to insurance companies, and I have
been sent down to try to find the cause of the
outbreak. I’ve seen the police sergeant, and he has
very kindly promised to show me his notes of the
inquest, but I should like more general information
than that. I wondered if you could, perhaps, tell
me something about the affair; about the people who
lived in Starvel, and so on?”</p>

<p>With this beginning, and the help of whiskies and
sodas and two more of his cigars French was soon
in possession of all the landlord knew and surmised
about the Starvel Hollow tragedy. But he learned
nothing helpful. The man’s story agreed with
that of Sergeant Kent, though it was obvious that
the idea of foul play had never entered his mind.</p>

<p>One thing he remarked on which Kent had not
mentioned—about which indeed, as French
afterwards learned, Kent knew nothing—and that was
the incipient affair between Ruth Averill and Pierce
Whymper. When French learned later on how
slight this affair had been he was filled with
amazement, as he had been so many times before, at the
range and exhaustiveness of local gossip.</p>

<p>“Nice young fellow, Mr. Pierce Whymper,” the
landlord went on. “He’s a son of Mr. Stephen
Whymper, the Leeds surgeon, and a junior assistant
of Nixon and Arbuthnot’s, the church architects.
He’s here as clerk of works of the renovation of
the church—a fine old church, this of ours! I got
to know Mr. Whymper a bit, for he stayed here
for a few days when he came first, and before he
got lodgings. Our terms are a bit high for him,
you know, for a constancy. They don’t overpay
these young fellows that are just starting on their
jobs.”</p>

<p>“It’s a fact,” French admitted. “And how is
the affair with the young lady getting on?”</p>

<p>“No one rightly knows. It seemed to be going
on thick enough before the fire and then, somehow,
it seemed to be cooled off. I suppose one of these
here lovers’ quarrels.” And the landlord smiled
tolerantly, as one man of the world to another.</p>

<p>But whether or not the landlord was a man of
the world, there was no doubt whatever that he was
a thoroughly accomplished and successful gossip.
French soon found that by the mere interjection of
an occasional phrase he could obtain a detailed
description of the life, habits and character of any of
the inhabitants of Thirsby that he cared to name.
Very willingly, therefore, he suggested more whisky
and proffered further cigars, while he sat registering
in his memory the impressions of his neighbours
which the other sketched with such evident relish.</p>

<p>He was a likeable old fellow, the landlord, or so
French thought. Though a gossip first and always,
he was something of a philosopher and his outlook
was human and kindly. The people he spoke of
were real people, and French could picture them
living in the little town and going about their
businesses, with their loves and hates, their ambitions
and their weaknesses. Old Mr. Averill—well, the
landlord hadn’t a great opinion of him. He was
dead, and one didn’t ought to say too much about
the dead, but there was no denying that he was
mean—a regular miser, he was. The way he had
treated that niece of his—as nice a young lady as
ever stepped—was just a fair scandal. A young
lady just grown up, like Miss Ruth was, should
have a bit of pleasure sometimes, and the poor girl
hadn’t even decent clothes to wear. Mean, the
landlord called it. And what use, he asked, growing
oratorical, was the old man’s money to him now?
That was what he said—and he waved his cigar
to give point to his remark—that was what he said:
What had the old man got for all his screwing and
saving? It would have paid him better . . .</p>

<p>French insinuated the idea of Roper.</p>

<p>Roper, the landlord did not know so much about,
though he had to confess he had not particularly
liked him. Roper had a squint, and if French took
the landlord’s advice, he would just keep his weather
eye open when dealing with a man with a squint.
Roper was quiet enough and civil spoken, and they
said he was good enough at his job, but he was
close—very close. Sly, the landlord would call it,
though, mind you, he hadn’t known anything wrong
about the man. Mrs. Roper? He had only met
her once. He didn’t know much about her, but
she was well enough spoken of. Neither of them
could have had much of a time out at Starvel, but
they had served the old man well and made no
complaint.</p>

<p>About Tarkington, the landlord waxed almost
lyrical. Tarkington was a white man, straight as
a die and no fool neither. He was more than a
bank manager. He was, so French gathered, a
sort of financial father confessor to the
neighbourhood. Every one trusted Tarkington, and took
their difficulties to him for help and advice. And
Tarkington gave both, in good measure pressed
down and shaken together. He did not spare
himself, and if he could help a lame dog over a stile,
he did it. What Tarkington said went, as far as
most things were concerned.</p>

<p>The landlord also approved of Oxley. Oxley
would have his joke, if he was to be hung for it
the next minute, but he was a very sound man and
a good lawyer. If you had Oxley on your side he
would make a keen fight for you, and for all his
jokes and his breezy manner he wouldn’t give
nothing away. Oxley was well liked and he deserved it.</p>

<p>Of the medical profession in Thirsby the
landlord was equally ready to impart information. Dr.
Emerson was a good doctor and well respected, but
he was growing old. He hardly did any work now,
but he had made plenty and he could afford to
retire. Not that he had been a money-grubber—the
landlord had known many a case where he had
treated poor patients free—but until Dr. Philpot
had come he had the whole of the practice, and
he hadn’t done badly with it. The landlord wished
that hotel keeping was half as profitable. Well off,
Dr. Emerson was.</p>

<p>French next murmured Dr. Philpot’s name, but
the landlord spoke with more reserve. He was a
clever man, first rate at his job, the landlord
believed, though he was thankful to say he hadn’t
ever needed to call him in. But he had made some
good cures and people that had had him once
wouldn’t have anybody else. And he was pleasant
spoken and likeable enough, and there was no
reason why he shouldn’t have done extra well at
Thirsby, for there was an opening for just such a
man on account of Dr. Emerson’s age. But—the
landlord sank his voice and became more confidential
than ever—the truth was he had made a muck of
things, and no one would be surprised to see him
take down his plate any day. He was all right in
every way, but the one—he was a wild gambler.
Fair ruining himself, he was. Horses mostly. It
was a pity, because he was well liked otherwise.
But there you were. The landlord had nothing
to say about backing an occasional horse—he did
it himself—but, systematic gambling! Well, you
know, it could go too far.</p>

<p>French was interested to learn that Sergeant Kent
was a fool. The landlord did not put it quite in
those words, but he conveyed the idea extraordinarily
well. Kent was bumptious and overbearing,
and carried away by a sense of his own importance.
French, the landlord was afraid, wouldn’t get much
help there.</p>

<p>The landlord showed signs of a willingness to
go on talking all night, but by the time eleven-thirty
had struck on the old grandfather’s clock in the
hall French thought he had all the information that
was likely to be valuable. He therefore began
insinuating the idea of bed, and this gradually
penetrating to the other’s consciousness, his flow of
conversation diminished and presently they
separated.</p>

<p>The next day was Sunday, and after a late
breakfast and a leisurely pipe, French asked for some
sandwiches, saying he was going out for a long
tramp over the moor. Having thus explained
himself he strolled off and presently, by a circuitous
route, reached the lip of Starvel Hollow.</p>

<p>In spite of the fact that his professional and
critical interests were aroused, French could not help
feeling impressed by the isolation of the ruins and
the morbid, not to say sinister atmosphere which
seemed to brood over the entire place. Around him
were the wild rolling spaces of the moor, forbidding
and desolate, rising here into rounded hills, dropping
there into shallow valleys. The colouring was drab,
in the foreground the dull greens of rushes and
sedgy grass, the browns of heather and at intervals
a darker smudge where stone outcropped, on the
horizon the hazy blues of distance. Scarcely a tree
or a shrub was to be seen in the bare country, and
the two or three widely separated cottages,
crouching low as if for protection from the winds, seemed
only to intensify the loneliness of the outlook.</p>

<p>At French’s feet lay the Hollow, a curious, saucer-like
depression in the moor, some quarter of a mile
or more across. Its rim looked continuous, the
valley through which it was drained being winding
and not apparent at first sight. In the centre was
the group of pines which had surrounded the old
house, stunted, leaning one way from the prevailing
wind, melancholy and depressing. Of the walls of
the house from this point of view there was no
sign.</p>

<p>French walked down toward the ruins, marvelling
at the choice which would bring a man of means to
such a locality. He could understand now why on
that night some five weeks earlier a building of the
size of this old house could be burned down without
attracting more attention. The Hollow accounted
for it. Even flames soaring up from such a
conflagration would not surmount the lip of the saucer.
Truly a place also, as Tarkington had pointed out,
where burglars could work their will unseen and
undisturbed.</p>

<p>French had seen the remains of many a fire, but
as he gazed on the wreckage of Starvel he felt he
had never seen anything quite so catastrophic and
complete. He felt a growing awe as he began to
examine the place in detail.</p>

<p>The walls were built of stone, and except these
walls and the small outhouse at the opposite side
of the yard, nothing remained standing. The house
was two storied and “L” shaped, with the remains
of a single story porch in the angle of the two
wings. French compared the ruins with the sketch
plan given him by Kent and identified the places
where the bodies had been found. Then after a
general survey he stepped through the gaping hole
that had evidently been the front door and ploughed
his way across the débris to the safe.</p>

<p>It was red with fire and rust, but the makers’
name and number, in raised letters on a cast iron
plate, were still legible. The safe had been lifted
upright and fixed on a roughly built pile of stones,
as the town officer of Thirsby had deposed at the
inquest. The doors were now shut, but with some
difficulty owing to the rusty hinges French was able
to swing them open. Inside, as he had been told,
was a mass of paper ash.</p>

<p>Fortunately it was a calm day or the heap might
have whirled away in dust. As it was, French sat
down on a stone, and putting his head into the safe,
began to examine the ash in detail.</p>

<p>The greater part had been ground to dust,
doubtless by the fall of the safe from the second story,
and the churning of the sovereigns, though there
still remained a number of small flakes of burnt
paper. These French began to turn over with a
pair of forceps, examining them at the same time
with a lens.</p>

<p>He was delighted to find that on nearly all he
could distinguish marks of printing. But, as he
turned over piece after piece he became conscious
of growing astonishment. For this printing was
not the printing of bank notes. Rather it seemed
to him like newspaper type. Wrapping paper, he
supposed. But why should the contents of the safe
have been wrapped up in newspapers? More
important still, why should portions of the newspapers
rather than of the notes have been preserved?</p>

<p>His interest keenly aroused, he set to work in
his careful, methodical way to check over all the
fragments he could find. As he did so something
very like excitement took possession of him. There
were no fragments of notes! Every single piece
that bore any marking was newspaper!</p>

<p>What, he asked, himself, could this portend?
What other than robbery? And if robbery, then
murder! Murder and arson! Could Tarkington
and the Chief Constable be right, after all?
Certainly, after this discovery he couldn’t drop the
investigation until he had made sure.</p>

<p>He had brought with him a small case of
apparatus, and from this he now took a bottle of gum
and some thin cards. Painting over the cards with
the gum, he laid on them such flakes of ash as bore
legible words. From one piece in particular he
thought he might be able to identify the newspaper
of which it had been a part. It was a roundish
scrap about the size of half a crown, along the top
of which were the words: “—ing as we—” in small
type, with below it in capitals, as if the headline
of a small paragraph: “RAT-CATCHER’S
F——”</p>

<p>French secured the cards in a case specially
designed to preserve specimens, and re-closed the safe.
It certainly looked as if Tarkington’s suggestions
might be true, and as he put the case away in his
pocket, he wondered if there was any further
investigation he could make while he was on the ground.</p>

<p>Stepping outside the building, he considered how
a hypothetical burglar might have forced an
entrance. The window frames and doors were all
gone; moreover, any marks which might have been
made approaching them must long since have been
defaced by time and the footprints of sightseers and
workmen. French, nevertheless, walked all round
the house and about the grounds, looking
everywhere in the hope of coming on some clue, though
he was scarcely disappointed when his search ended
in failure.</p>

<p>He was anxious, if possible, to find out what
newspaper had been burned. He did not think the point
of vital importance, but on general principles the
information should be obtained. There was no
knowing what clue it might not furnish. On his
way back to Thirsby, therefore, he turned aside
to Mr. Oxley’s house and sent in his card.</p>

<p>In the privacy of the solicitor’s study French
introduced himself and in confidence declared his
mission to the town. He apologised for troubling
the other on Sunday, but said that at the moment
he wished only to ask one question: Could Mr.
Oxley tell him, or could he find out for him from
Miss Averill, what daily paper the late Mr. Averill
had taken?</p>

<p>Mr. Oxley did not know, and excused himself
to interrogate Ruth. Presently he returned to say
it was the <i>Leeds Mercury</i>.</p>

<p>Next morning French took the first train to
Leeds, and going to the <i>Mercury</i> office, asked to
see the files of the paper for the month of
September. Commencing at the 15th, the day of the fire,
he began working back through the papers,
scrutinising each sheet for a paragraph headed
“RAT-CATCHER’S F——”</p>

<p>He found it sooner than he had expected. Tucked
in among a number of small news items in the paper
of Tuesday, 14th September, he read:
“RAT-CATCHER’S FATAL FALL.” And when he saw
that the type was similar to that on the burnt scrap
and the last line of the preceding paragraph was
“Mr. Thomas is doing as well as can be expected,”
with the “—ng as we—” in the correct position
relative to the “RAT-CATCHER’S F——” he
knew he had really got what he wanted.</p>

<p>French was extraordinarily thorough. Long
experience had taught him that everything in the
nature of a clue should be followed up to the very
end. He did not therefore desist when he had
made his find. Instead he worked on to see if he
could identify any of the other scraps he had found.
And before he left he had found eight out of the
eleven he had mounted, and proved that the burnt
papers were those of the 13th, 14th, and 15th; the
three days before the fire.</p>

<p>So far, then, the indications were at least for
continuing the investigation. Leaving the <i>Mercury</i>
office, French walked up the Briggate to Messrs.
Carter &amp; Stephenson’s, the makers of the safe. He
asked for one of the principals, and was presently
shown into Mr. Stephenson’s room. Introducing
himself in the strictest confidence in his true guise,
he propounded his question: Was the safe
absolutely fireproof?</p>

<p>Mr. Stephenson rose and went to a drawer from
which he took a number of photographs.</p>

<p>“Look at those,” he invited, “and tell me was
the fire at Starvel any worse than those fires?”</p>

<p>The views were all of burnt-out buildings, most
of them completely gutted and resembling the
wreckage of Starvel. French assured him that the cases
seemed on all fours.</p>

<p>“Very well, there were safes in all those fires—safes
just the same as that at Starvel, and all
those safes had papers in them, and there wasn’t
a single paper in any one of them so much as
browned.”</p>

<p>French took out his burnt fragments.</p>

<p>“Look at those, Mr. Stephenson,” he invited in
his turn. “Suppose there were newspapers in that
safe before the fire, could they have come out like
that after it?”</p>

<p>“Not under any conceivable circumstances,” Mr.
Stephenson declared emphatically, “that is, of
course, unless the door had been left open. With
the door shut it’s absolutely impossible. And I’ll
be prepared to stand by that in any court of law
if you should want me to.”</p>

<p>The man’s manner was convincing, and French
saw no reason to doubt his statement. But he saw
also that its truth involved extremely serious
consequences. If Mr. Stephenson was right the
newspapers had not been burnt during the Starvel fire.
They could only have been burned while the safe
door was open. But the door was locked during
the fire; Kent had had to get an expert to open it.
They must therefore have been burned before it
was locked. A sinister fact truly, and terribly
suggestive!</p>

<p>On his way back to Thirsby French sat smoking in
the corner of a carriage, weighing in his mind the
significance of his discoveries. He considered the
points in order.</p>

<p>First. Old Averill was a miser who had filled up
his safe with notes and gold. The notes had been
seen on more than one occasion by Mr. Tarkington’s
clerk, Bloxham, the last time being only a few
days before the tragedy. Mr. Tarkington estimated
there must have been some £30,000 to £40,000
worth of notes in the safe, though this was probably
only a guess. But it was at least certain that before
the fire it contained a very large sum in notes.</p>

<p>Second. After the fire the gold was intact, or at
least part of it was there, but there was no trace of
the notes. It was perfectly true that a number of
notes might have been burned and been crushed
to powder by the falling sovereigns. But it was
straining the probabilities too far to believe that
no single fragment of any one note should remain.
On the other hand fragments did remain—but these
were all of newspapers.</p>

<p>Third. The newspapers, according to Mr.
Stephenson’s evidence, were burned before the door of the
safe had been closed.</p>

<p>Gradually French came to definite conclusions.
As far as his information went the following facts
seemed to be established:—</p>

<p>First. That the safe was unlocked, and the notes
were taken out before the fire.</p>

<p>Second. That three or four newspapers were put
in to replace them.</p>

<p>Third. That the newspapers were set on fire and
allowed to burn to ashes while the safe door was
open.</p>

<p>Fourth. That after they were burned the safe
was locked.</p>

<p>If these conclusions could be sustained it
unquestionably meant that French was on to one of the
most dastardly and terrible crimes of the century.
He felt the sudden thrill of the hunter who comes
across the fresh spoor of some dangerous wild
beast. But he did not disclose his feelings. Instead
he kept his own counsel, simply reporting to
headquarters that the case seemed suspicious and that
he was remaining on to make further inquiries.</p>

</div>

<div class="chapter" id="ch05">

<h2>CHAPTER FIVE: French Picks Up a Clue</h2>

<p>The more Inspector French pondered over the
problems which his discoveries had raised, the more
difficult these problems seemed to grow. There
was so desperately little to go on. It was a
common enough trouble in detective work certainly, but
this business was worse than the average. He could
not recall a case which offered fewer clues or
“leads.”</p>

<p>As he turned over in his mind all that he had
learned it seemed to him indeed that there was but
one channel to be explored, and that a channel which
offered a very poor chance of success—the £20 bank
note. If he were unable to trace the £20 bank note,
and the odds were enormously against his doing so,
he did not see what other line of inquiry he could
follow up.</p>

<p>Of course, there was the usual police question:
Who was seen in the vicinity of the crime at the
time of its commission? But he had already put
this inquiry to Kent and the answer had been: “No
one.”</p>

<p>If, as seemed likely, Tarkington’s theory were
true and this crime had been committed by the
burglars who had already brought off so many <i lang="fr">coups</i>
in the district, French was up against a very able
gang. For over six months the police had been
searching for these men and they seemed no nearer
finding them now than in the beginning.</p>

<p>The bank note, then, appeared to be the only
chance, and French decided that he would begin
operations by trying to trace the passer, trusting
that if this line failed, some other would by that
time have opened out.</p>

<p>The night was still young, and desiring to lose no
time, French left his comfortable corner in the bar
and went out to call on Mr. Tarkington.</p>

<p>The bank manager was greatly interested when
French revealed his calling and mission. He
willingly repeated all he knew about old Simon Averill
and his finances and explained his theories at length.</p>

<p>“The only other thing I wish to ask you,” French
remarked when the other showed signs of coming to
an end, “is about previous sums sent out to Starvel.
Your clerk kept a record of the numbers of all the
twenty-pound notes sent in the last consignment, but
have you a similar record of former consignments?”</p>

<p>Mr. Tarkington nodded.</p>

<p>“I early appreciated that point and made
inquiries,” he replied in his precise, measured tones.
“By my own instructions it has been the practice to
keep such records of all notes over ten pounds in
value, and this was done in the case of those sent to
Starvel. The records, however, are not retained very
long, and I did not hope to be able to lay my hands
on those of earlier consignments. But by a piece
of pure chance my clerk, Bloxham, found some
earlier records in an old notebook, and I am able
to give you the numbers of the notes of eleven; not
consecutive consignments, but stretching at intervals
over nearly five years. They cover £3860, all of
which was sent to Starvel in twenties; that is 193
twenties. I have their numbers here.”</p>

<p>“That’s a piece of luck for me,” French
commented, as he pocketed the list which the other
passed him. “Curious that Mr. Averill collected
twenty-pound notes. Why not fifties or hundreds
or tens?”</p>

<p>Mr. Tarkington shook his head.</p>

<p>“Like most of us,” he said, a hint of human
kindness showing beneath his rather dry manner, “the
poor old fellow had his weakness. Why he should
prefer twenties to notes of other denominations I
don’t know. I can only record the fact that he
did.”</p>

<p>The next morning French occupied in making the
acquaintance of the obvious <i lang="la">dramatis personæ</i> in the
case. He paid a long visit to Ruth Averill, hearing
her story at first hand and questioning her on various
details which occurred to him. Oxley he saw at his
office and the lugubrious Abel Hesketh, the town
officer, he found at the toll room in the markets.
He was waiting for Dr. Emerson as the latter
concluded his morning round, and he went to the trouble
of an excursion over the moor to interview the
red-haired farmer, George Mellowes, who had driven
Roper home on the fatal night. Dr. Philpot he
also called on, to obtain his impressions of the
Starvel household.</p>

<p>Lastly, he saw the bank clerk, Bloxham, who
struck him at once as a man of character. Though
seemingly not more than thirty, he had a strangely
old face, sardonic and determined looking, almost
sinister. He gave his testimony with a refreshing
restraint of words, and seemed to have observed
carefully and to know just what he had seen. He
said that on three occasions when he was at Starvel
Mr. Averill had opened his safe and he had had
a glimpse of its contents. From the size of the
stacks of notes he would estimate that these
contained possibly 1500 separate notes. If these were
twenties that would mean £30,000. There was also
a cardboard box of sovereigns. If he had not heard
the number he would have estimated that it
contained about two thousand.</p>

<p>To all of these people, except Oxley, who already
knew the truth, French accounted for himself by
the story of the detective employed to ascertain the
cause of an unexplained fire. All seemed anxious
to help him, but unfortunately none could tell him
anything more than he already knew.</p>

<p>Having thus completed the obvious local
inquiries, he felt free to follow up the matter of the
£20 note. He therefore left Thirsby by the
afternoon train and late that night reached St. Pancras.
Next morning saw him at the headquarters of the
Northern Shires Bank in Throgmorton Avenue. In
five minutes he was closeted with the manager, who
shook his head when he heard what was required
of him.</p>

<p>“I naturally imagined some such question might
arise,” the manager said, “and I questioned the
clerk who had received the note. At first he was
unable to give me even the slightest hint, but on
thinking over the matter he said the balance of
probability was in favour of its having been paid in by
the messenger from Cook’s office in Regent Street.
He explained that in Cook’s deposit, which was
an unusually heavy one, there were no less than
seventeen notes for twenty pounds, and he remarked
to the messenger: ‘You’re strong in twenties
to-day.’ It was shortly afterwards that the clerk
discovered he held one of the numbers sent in by Mr.
Tarkington. He had twenty-two twenties in hand
when he made his discovery and he believed he had
not parted with any since the Cook lodgment,
therefore, the chances that the note came from Cook’s
are as seventeen to five.”</p>

<p>“There is no certainty about that,” said French.</p>

<p>“No certainty, but a good sporting chance,” the
manager returned with a smile as he bade his visitor
good day.</p>

<p>The next step was obviously Cook’s office. Here
again French asked for the manager, and here again
that gentleman shook his head when French stated
his business.</p>

<p>“I should be only too glad to help you, Mr.
French,” he declared, “but I fear it is quite
impossible. In the first place we don’t know the numbers
of any of the notes which passed through our hands,
and we don’t, therefore, know if we had the one
in which you are interested. Apparently you don’t
even know it yourself. But even if we did know,
we couldn’t possibly tell you who paid it in. So
much money comes in over the counter that
individual notes could not be traced. And then we have
no idea of the date upon which we received this
one, if we did receive it. You think we lodged it
yesterday week. We might have done so and yet
have received it weeks before. You see, we keep
a fairly large sum in our safe in connection with our
foreign exchange department.”</p>

<p>“Do you give receipts for all monies received?”</p>

<p>“For most transactions. But not all. If a man
came in for a ticket to Harrogate, for example, we
should hand him the ticket, and the ticket would be
his receipt. Again, no note other than that of the
actual sums passing is taken in our exchange
department.”</p>

<p>French smiled ruefully.</p>

<p>“It doesn’t seem to get any more hopeful as it
goes on, does it?” he remarked, continuing after a
moment’s silence. “You see what I’m trying to get
at, don’t you? If I could look over your receipts
for some time prior to yesterday week I might find
a name and address which would suggest a line of
inquiry.”</p>

<p>“I follow you,” the manager returned. “It is
just possible that you might get something that way,
though I must warn you it’s most unlikely. You
see, the balance of the payments in notes would not,
in the nature of things, require receipts, and
conversely most of the accounts requiring receipts are
paid by cheque. However, if you wish to make a
search, I am prepared to help you. How far back
do you want to go?”</p>

<p>“The note in question was known to be in the
possession of the dead man on Friday, 10th
September. It was discovered in the bank here on Monday,
October 18th. That is,” he took out his engagement
book and rapidly counted, “thirty-three working
days: a little over five weeks.” He looked
deprecatingly at the other, then added: “Rather a job to go
through all that, I’m afraid.”</p>

<p>“It’ll take time,” the manager admitted. “But
that’s your funeral. If you wish to see our books, I
shall be pleased to facilitate you in every way I can.”</p>

<p>French thanked him and a few minutes later was
hard at work under the guidance of a clerk going
through interminable lists of names and addresses.
For two hours he kept on steadily, then suddenly
surprised his companion by giving a muttered curse.
He had come on a name which dashed all his hopes
and showed him that his one clue was a wash out.
The item read:—</p>

<p>“Oct. 6th. Pierce Whymper, Oaklands, Bolton
Road, Leeds,—£16 8s. 4d.”</p>

<p>“Curse it!” French thought. “There goes all my
work! There’s where the twenty-pound note came
from all right. That young man has been out at
Starvel before the fire and Averill has given him the
note for some purpose of his own.”</p>

<p>French was disgusted. Though he had known his
clue was weak, he had, nevertheless, subconsciously
been building on it, and now that it was gone he felt
correspondingly at a loss. However, thoroughness
before all things! He continued his study of the
books, working through the period until he reached
the end, but nowhere else did he get any hint of a
possible connection with the tragedy.</p>

<p>But the same habit of thoroughness prevented his
dropping the matter until he had explored its every
possibility. He asked the clerk to take him once
again to the manager.</p>

<p>“Your kind help, sir, and this young gentleman’s,
have not been wasted,” he began. “I’ve almost
certainly got the man who gave you the note.
Unfortunately, however, he turns out to be some one who
could have obtained it from its owner in a perfectly
legitimate way. So I fear its usefulness as a clue is
nil. At the same time I should like to follow up the
transaction and make quite sure it is all right. It is
this one that I have marked—name of Whymper.”</p>

<p>“Fortunately,” the manager answered, “that is an
easier proposition than the last.” He directed the
clerk to conduct French to a Mr. Bankes. “Mr.
Bankes will give you details about that case,” he
went on, “and if there is anything further you
require, just come back to me.”</p>

<p>Mr. Bankes proved most willing to assist, and in a
few moments the whole of the transactions between
Mr. Pierce Whymper of the one part and Messrs.
Thos. Cook &amp; Son of the other part, stood revealed.
They were as follows:—</p>

<p>On Saturday, 18th September, the day of the
inquest at Thirsby, Whymper had written to ask the
cost of a second class return ticket from London to
Talloires, near Annecy, Savoy, and to know if a
passport would be necessary for the journey, and if so,
where such was to be obtained. This letter was
received at Cook’s on Monday evening and replied
to on Tuesday 21st. Two days later Whymper
wrote asking Messrs. Cook to provide the tickets as
well as various coupons for meals, etc., en route,
which, he said, he would call for on the afternoon of
Wednesday, October 6th. He evidently had done
so, as on that date a receipt had been made out to
him for the £16 8s. 4d.</p>

<p>“What was the route covered?” French inquired.</p>

<p>“Dover-Calais, Paris Nord, Paris P.L.M., Bourg,
Amberieu, Culoz, and Aix-les-bains. Return the
same way. Meals on the outward journey were
included as well as three days’ pension at the Hotel
Splendide, Annecy.”</p>

<p>“I don’t know Annecy at all. What kind of place
is it?”</p>

<p>“Delightful little town on the lake of the same
name. A tourist place, becoming better known in
recent years. I could recommend it for any one who
liked a fairly quiet change.”</p>

<p>“But surely October is too late for it?”</p>

<p>“Well, yes, it’s rather late. Still, I have no doubt
it would be pleasant enough even then.”</p>

<p>Next day French travelled back to Thirsby. He
was in a very despondent frame of mind, for he did
not see a single clue or line of inquiry which might
lead to the solution of his case. He would, of course,
interview Whymper and follow up the affair of the
bank note, but he felt certain that the young man
had obtained it in a legitimate way, and that his
inquiries would lead nowhere.</p>

<p>From the talkative Miss Judith Carr, the barmaid
at the Thirsby Arms, French learned that Whymper
had lodgings on the outskirts of the town, at 12
Stanhope Terrace, and when dusk had fallen he went
out to make the young man’s acquaintance.</p>

<p>Whymper was at work on some plans when
French was shown into his sitting-room. He was a
typical, healthy-looking Englishman of the upper
middle class. French observed him with some
favour, as not at all the type to be mixed up in
criminal enterprises. He rose on French’s entry,
and with a slight look of surprise, indicated an
arm-chair at the fire.</p>

<p>“Mr. Pierce Whymper?” French began with his
pleasant smile. “My name is French, and I called
to see you on a small matter in which I am going to
ask your kind help.”</p>

<p>Whymper murmured encouragingly.</p>

<p>“I must explain in the very strictest confidence,”
French went on, glancing searchingly at the other,
“that I am an inspector in the Criminal
Investigation Department of New Scotland Yard, and it is
in connection with an investigation I am making that
I want your assistance.”</p>

<p>As he spoke French had been watching his
companion, not with inimical intent, but as a matter of
mere habit. He was surprised and interested to
notice a look of apprehension amounting almost to
fear in the young man’s eyes, while his face paled
perceptibly, and he moved uneasily in his seat.
French decided at once to be more careful in his
examination than he had intended.</p>

<p>“I have been,” he resumed, “working at Messrs.
Cook’s office in Regent Street. I need not go into
details, but there has been a robbery, and they have
been handling some of the stolen money. Your
name appeared among others who had been dealing
with them during the period in question, and I am
trying to find out if you or these others could
unwittingly have passed in the money.”</p>

<p>That Whymper was experiencing considerable
relief French was sure. He did not reply, but nodded
expectantly.</p>

<p>“I can ask everything I want in a single question.”
French’s voice was friendly and matter of fact,
though he watched the other intently. “Where did
you get the twenty-pound note with which you paid
for your trip to Annecy?”</p>

<p>Whymper started and the signs of uneasiness
showed tenfold more strongly.</p>

<p>“Where did I get it?” he stammered, while French
noted the admission his bluff had drawn. “Why, I
couldn’t tell you. I had it for a considerable time.
It probably came in my pay.”</p>

<p>“You get your pay in notes?” French’s voice was
stern.</p>

<p>“Well, sometimes—that is, I may have got the
note from my father. He makes me an allowance.”
The young man twisted nervously in his chair and
gave every sign of embarrassment. French, whose
experience of statement makers was profound, said
to himself: “The man’s lying.”</p>

<p>It did not occur to him that this thoroughly
normal looking youth could be guilty of the Starvel
Hollow crime, but it suddenly seemed possible that
he might know something about it.</p>

<p>“I should like you to think carefully, Mr.
Whymper. The matter is more serious than perhaps you
realise. You handed Messrs. Cook a stolen
twenty-pound note. I am not suggesting that you stole it or
that you are in any way to blame for passing it. But
you must tell me where you got it. You cannot
expect me to believe that you don’t know.
Twenty-pound notes are too uncommon for that.”</p>

<p>Rather to French’s surprise the young man began
once more to show relief.</p>

<p>“But that’s what I must tell you, Inspector,” he
declared, but he did not meet French’s eye, and again
the other felt he was lying. “I have had that note
for a long time and I don’t really remember how it
came into my possession.”</p>

<p>“Now, Mr. Whymper, as a friend I should urge
you to think again. I am not making any threats,
but it may become very awkward for you if you
persist in that statement. Think it over. I assure you
it will be worth your while.”</p>

<p>French spoke coaxingly and the other promised he
would try to remember. He seemed to French like a
man who felt he had been exposed to a danger which
was now happily past. But if he thought he had got
rid of his visitor he was mistaken.</p>

<p>“When were you last at Starvel, Mr. Whymper?”</p>

<p>At this question Whymper seemed to crumple
up. He stared at his questioner with an expression
of something very like horror. When he answered
it was almost in a whisper.</p>

<p>“The day after the fire. I have not been there
since.”</p>

<p>“I don’t mean that. I mean, when were you last
there before the fire?”</p>

<p>Whymper’s composure was coming back. He
seemed to be nerving himself for a struggle. He
spoke more normally.</p>

<p>“Really, I couldn’t tell you, Inspector. It was a
long time ago. I was only there half a dozen times
in my life. Once it was by Miss Averill’s invitation,
the other times on the chance of seeing her.”</p>

<p>“Were you there within a week of the fire?”</p>

<p>“Oh no. The last time was long before that.”</p>

<p>“Had you any communication with Mr. Averill—I
mean within a week of the fire?”</p>

<p>“No. I never had any communication with Mr.
Averill. I have never seen him.”</p>

<p>“Or with any one in the household; either by
letter, telegram, telephone, personal interview or in
any other way whatever?”</p>

<p>“Yes. I met Miss Averill accidentally on the day
before the fire. Mrs. Oxley, the wife of a solicitor
here, came round to the church where I am working
to see about some stones she was buying, and Miss
Averill was with her. Miss Averill was on her way
to stay with some friends and I saw her to the
station.”</p>

<p>“Did she give you the twenty-pound note?”</p>

<p>“She did nothing of the kind,” Whymper returned
with some heat.</p>

<p>“Was Miss Averill the only member of the
Starvel household with whom you communicated during
the week before the fire?”</p>

<p>Whymper hesitated and appeared to be thinking.</p>

<p>“Well, Mr. Whymper?”</p>

<p>“I met Roper, Mr. Averill’s valet and general
man, for a moment on the evening of the fire. We
met by chance and merely wished each other
good-evening.”</p>

<p>“Where did you meet him?”</p>

<p>“On the street just outside the church gate. I was
leaving work for the night.”</p>

<p>“At what hour was that?”</p>

<p>“About half-past five.”</p>

<p>“And do you assure me that you had no other
communication with any member of the Starvel
household during the period in question?”</p>

<p>“None.”</p>

<p>“Nor received any message through any third
party?”</p>

<p>“No.”</p>

<p>“Well, Mr. Whymper, it is only fair to tell you
that the note in question was in Mr. Averill’s safe
five days before the fire. You will have to explain
how it came into your possession, if not to me, then
later on in court. Now think,” French’s voice was
suave and coaxing, “would you not rather tell me
here in private than have it dragged out of you in
the witness box?”</p>

<p>“I would tell you at once, Mr. French, if I had
anything to tell, but I’ve nothing. There must
be some mistake about the note. The one I gave to
Messrs. Cook couldn’t possibly have been in Mr.
Averill’s safe at any time.”</p>

<p>The words sounded reasonable, but Whymper’s
manner discounted them. More than ever was
French convinced that the man was lying. He
pressed him as hard as he could, but Whymper
stuck to his story and nothing that French could say
shook him. French, of course, could only bluff. He
was quite unable to prove that Whymper had really
passed the stolen note, and though he believed he
had done so, he fully realised that he might be
mistaken.</p>

<p>Recognising he had failed for the moment, French
set himself to calm the other’s anxieties before
taking his leave. He pretended to accept the young
man’s statement, saying he was afraid his journey
had proved a wild-goose chase, and that he would
now have to interview the other persons whose
names he had obtained from Cook’s. Whether his
efforts were successful he wasn’t sure, but the look of
relief on Whymper’s face made him think so.
Outwardly at all events both men seemed to consider the
incident closed when, after French had again warned
the other as to secrecy, they bade each other
good-night.</p>

<p>But to French it was very far indeed from being
closed. He saw that the matter must be probed to
the bottom. There was, however, nothing he could
do that night except to take one obvious precaution.
Whymper must be watched, and going to the police
station he surprised Sergeant Kent considerably by
asking him to put the young man under careful
surveillance.</p>

<p>This precaution was a bow drawn at a venture,
but to French’s surprise and delight, on the very next
day it proved that the arrow had found its way
between the joints of Whymper’s harness. While he
was breakfasting a note was brought to him from
Kent. In it the sergeant said that as a result of the
order to put a watch on Whymper, Constable
Sheldrake had made a statement which he, Kent, thought
the inspector should hear. Sheldrake said that on
the evening of the fire he had spent a couple of his
free hours in taking a walk in the direction of
Starvel with a friend of his, a young lady. Between
half-past nine and ten the two were approaching
the junction where the Starvel lane diverged from
the road which circled round the outside of the
hollow, when they heard steps approaching. Not
wishing to be observed, they had slipped behind some
bushes, and they had seen a man coming from the
Starvel lane. He had passed close to them, and by
the light of the moon Constable Sheldrake had not
only recognised Whymper, but had seen that his face
bore an expression of horror and distress. At the
time there was no suspicion either of Whymper or
of foul play at Starvel, and the constable, not
wishing to be chaffed about the girl, had not mentioned
the matter. But now he believed it to be his duty
to come forward with his report.</p>

<p>Here was food for thought. The Starvel lane
after passing through the Hollow almost petered
out. As a rough track it wound on past one or two
isolated cottages, debouching at last into a cross
road some four miles farther on. It was therefore
most unlikely that Whymper could have been
coming from anywhere except Starvel. But if he had
been coming from Starvel he had lied, as he had
stated that he had not been there within a week of
the fire.</p>

<p>This fact made French’s next step all the more
imperative. He went down to the police station and
saw Kent.</p>

<p>“Look here, sergeant,” he explained, “I want to
search that young man’s rooms and I want your help.
Will you do two things for me? First, I want you
to find out at what time he goes home in the
evening and let me know, and second to make some
pretext to keep him half an hour later than usual at the
church to-night. Can you manage that?”</p>

<p>“Of course, Mr. French. You may count on me.”</p>

<p>Kent was as good as his word. When French
returned to the hotel in the afternoon a note was
waiting for him, saying that Whymper always reached
home about six. Accordingly ten minutes before six
found French once more knocking at the door of 12
Stanhope Terrace.</p>

<p>“Has Mr. Whymper come back yet?” he asked
the stout, good-humoured looking landlady.</p>

<p>She recognised her visitor of the night before and
smiled.</p>

<p>“Not yet, sir. But he won’t be long. Will you
come in and wait?”</p>

<p>This was what French wanted. It was better that
she should suggest it than he. He paused
doubtfully.</p>

<p>“Thanks,” he said at last, “perhaps it would be
better if you think he won’t be long.”</p>

<p>“He might be here any time. Will you go up,
sir? You know your way.”</p>

<p>French thanked her and slowly mounted the stairs.
But once in Whymper’s sitting-room with the door
shut behind him his deliberation dropped from him
like a cloak and he became the personification of
swift efficiency. Noiselessly he turned the key in the
lock and then quickly but silently began a search of
the room.</p>

<p>It was furnished rather more comfortably than
the average lodging-house sitting room, though it
retained its family resemblance to the dreary species.
In the centre was a table on half of which was a
more or less white cloth and the preparations for a
meal. Two dining-room chairs and two easy chairs,
one without arms, represented the seating
accommodations. A sideboard, a corner cabinet laden with
nondescript ornaments, a china dog and a few books,
together with a small modern roll-top desk
completed the furniture. On the walls were pictures, a
royal family group of the early eighties and some
imaginative views of sailing ships labouring on
stormy seas. A gilt clock with a bell glass cover
stood on the chimney-piece between a pair of china
vases containing paper flowers.</p>

<p>French immediately realised that of all these
objects, only the desk was of interest to him. It
was evidently Whymper’s private property, and in
its locked drawers would lie any secret documents
the young man might possess. Silently French got
to work with his bunch of skeleton keys and a little
apparatus of steel wire, and in two or three minutes
he was able to push the lid gently up. This released
the drawers, and one by one he drew them out and
ran through their contents.</p>

<p>He had examined rather more than half when he
pursed his lips together and gave vent to a soundless
whistle. In a small but bulky envelope at the back
of one of the drawers was a roll of banknotes. He
drew them out and counted them. They were all
twenties. Twenty-four of them—£480.</p>

<p>With something approaching excitement French
took from his pocket the list given him by
Tarkington of the numbers of twenty-pound notes sent to
Starvel. A few seconds sufficed to compare. Every
single one of the twenty-four was on the list!</p>

</div>

<div class="chapter" id="ch06">

<h2>CHAPTER SIX: Talloires, Lac D’Annecy</h2>

<p>Having noted the twenty-four numbers, French
hurriedly replaced the notes and with even more
speed looked through the remaining drawers. He
was now chiefly anxious that Whymper should not
suspect his discovery, and as soon as he was satisfied
that he had left no traces of his search, he silently
unlocked the door and then walked noisily
downstairs. As he reached the hall the landlady appeared
from the kitchen.</p>

<p>“I’m sorry, ma’am,” he said politely, “that I
cannot wait any longer now. I have another
appointment. Please tell Mr. Whymper that I’ll call to see
him at the church to-morrow.”</p>

<p>The door closed behind him, but he made no
attempt to return to the hotel. Instead he hung about
the terrace until he saw Whymper approaching in
the distance: Then walking towards him, he hailed
him as if their meeting was accidental.</p>

<p>“Good-evening, Mr. Whymper. I’ve just been
calling at your rooms to ask if you could see me at
the church to-morrow. One or two points occurred
to me in connection with our discussion of last night,
and I wanted to get your views on them.
Unfortunately I have an appointment to-night, and cannot
wait now.”</p>

<p>Whymper, evidently not too pleased at the
prospect, curtly admitted he would be available, and with
a short “Good-night,” passed on.</p>

<p>French went his way also, but when in a few
seconds the shadowing constable put in an appearance,
he stopped him.</p>

<p>“Look here, Hughes. I have a suspicion that
Whymper may try to get rid of some papers
to-night. Be specially careful if you see him trying to
do anything of the kind, and let me hear from you
about it in the morning.”</p>

<p>He reached the hotel and in his pleasant way had
a leisurely chat with the landlord before turning in.
But when once he reached his room for the night he
lit a cigar and settled down to see just where he
stood.</p>

<p>It was obvious in the first place that the evidence
which he had obtained against Pierce Whymper
would have been considered by most police officers
sufficient to justify an arrest. To find a man
suspected of the theft with the stolen property in his
possession was usually reckoned an overwhelming
proof of his guilt. And if to this be added the fact
that the accused was seen in the neighbourhood of
the crime about the time of its commission, having
previously denied being there, and further, that his
whole bearing when questioned was evasive and
embarrassed, any lingering doubt might well have been
swept away.</p>

<p>But French was not wholly satisfied. A ripe
experience had made him an almost uncanny judge of
character and he felt a strong impression that Pierce
Whymper was not of the stuff of which thieves and
murderers are made. That the young man knew
something about the crime he had no doubt; that he
was guilty of it he was not so certain.</p>

<p>He racked his brains as to whether there was no
other statement of Whymper’s which he could check.
Then he remembered that the young architect had
admitted having seen Roper on the afternoon of the
tragedy. This was a point of contact with Starvel,
and French wondered whether more might not have
passed between the two men than Whymper had
divulged. He decided that it would be worth while
trying to find out.</p>

<p>According to his own statement Whymper had
met Roper outside the church gate at about 5.30 on
the evening in question. Next morning French
therefore strolled to the church, and getting into
conversation with one of the workmen, learned that the
sexton was usually waiting to lock up when the men
left at 5.15. From the notice board he learned the
sexton’s address, ran him to earth and explained that
he wished to speak to him confidentially.</p>

<p>To his customary story of the insurance company
who wished to discover the cause of the Starvel fire
he added some slight embroidery. At the inquest a
suggestion was made of contributory negligence—in
other words, drink—and his instructions were to find
out what he could about this possibility.</p>

<p>Now he had heard that Roper was seen outside
the church gate about 5.30 on the afternoon of the
tragedy and he, French, wondered whether the
sexton might not have noticed him when locking up.</p>

<p>It was a long shot, but rather to French’s
surprise, it got a bull’s eye. The sexton had seen Mr.
Roper. Mr. Whymper, the young gentleman in
charge of the renovation, had been ten or fifteen
minutes late finishing up that evening and he, the
sexton, had waited by the gate till he should leave.
While there he had noticed Roper. The man seemed
to be hanging about as if waiting for some one, and
when Mr. Whymper appeared, Roper went up and
spoke to him. The two men talked together as if
Roper were delivering a message, then they
separated, walking off in opposite directions. They
talked, the sexton was sure, for two or three
minutes. No, he did not observe the slightest sign of
drink on Mr. Roper. As a matter of fact the man
wished him good-evening and he could swear he was
then perfectly sober.</p>

<p>“Well, I’m glad to know that,” French declared,
“though I suppose it is really against my company.
But I expect we shall have to pay in any case. Now,
I think I’d best see this Mr. Whymper you speak of,
and get his confirmation of your views.”</p>

<p>“You’ll find him in the church, probably in the
north transept where they’re rebuilding the window.”</p>

<p>French did not, however, go immediately to the
north transept of the church. Instead he found his
way to the residence of a certain Colonel Followes,
a prominent magistrate with a reputation for
discretion, whose name had been given him by Sergeant
Kent. He took the colonel into his confidence, made
the necessary formal statement and obtained a
warrant for the arrest of Pierce Whymper. Whether
or not he would execute it would depend on the
young man’s answers to his further questions, but he
wished to be able to do so if, at the time, it seemed
wise.</p>

<p>Returning to the church, French found his quarry
superintending the resetting of the stone mullions of
the beautiful north transept window. He waited
until the young man was free, then said that he
would be glad if they could now have their talk.</p>

<p>“Come into the vestry room,” Whymper returned.
“I use it as an office and we won’t be disturbed.”</p>

<p>Of all the sights which the groined roof of the old
vestry had looked down on during the three
centuries of its existence, none perhaps was so out of
keeping with the character of the place as this
interview between a detective of the C.I.D. and the man
whom he half suspected of murder, arson, and
burglary. And yet there was nothing dramatic about
their conversation. French spoke quietly, as if their
business was everyday and matter of fact.
Whymper, though he was evidently under strain, gave none
of the evidence of apprehension he had exhibited on
the previous evening. Rather had he the air of a
man who feared no surprise as he had braced
himself to meet the worst. He waited in silence for the
other to begin.</p>

<p>“I am sorry, Mr. Whymper,” French said at last,
“to have to return to the subject we discussed last
night, but since then further facts have come to my
knowledge which render it necessary. I think it
right to tell you that these facts suggest that you
may be guilty of a number of extremely serious
crimes. I am, however, aware that facts,
improperly understood, may be misleading, and I wish,
therefore, to give you an opportunity of explaining
the matters which seem to incriminate you. I would
like to ask you a number of questions, but before I
do so I must warn you that if your answers are
unsatisfactory I must arrest you, and then anything
you have said may be used in evidence against you.”</p>

<p>Whymper had paled slightly while the other was
speaking. “I shall try to answer your questions,”
he said in a low voice, and French resumed:—</p>

<p>“The main question is, of course, the one I asked
you last night: Where did you get the twenty-pound
note with which you paid Messrs. Cook? You
needn’t tell me that you don’t know. Apart from
the improbability of that I have absolute proof that
you know quite well. Now, Mr. Whymper, if you
are innocent you have nothing to fear. Tell me the
truth. I can promise you I will give your statement
every consideration.”</p>

<p>“I have already explained that I don’t know where
the note came from.”</p>

<p>French paused, frowning and looking inquiringly
at the other.</p>

<p>“Very well,” he said at last, “let us leave it at
that for the moment. Now tell me: Did you receive
any other money from Mr. Averill or Miss Averill,
or Roper or Mrs. Roper within three or four days
of the fire?”</p>

<p>“None.”</p>

<p>“There was a matter of a certain £500. It was in
Mr. Averill’s safe four days before the fire. All but
twenty pounds of it was in your possession last night.
Now where did you obtain that money?”</p>

<p>In spite of his being prepared for the worst,
Whymper seemed completely taken aback by the
question. He did not answer, but sat staring at the
Inspector, while an expression of utter hopelessness
grew on his face. French went on:—</p>

<p>“You see, Mr. Whymper, I know all about your
having that money. And I know that you were at
Starvel on the night of the fire. I know also that
your interview with Roper outside the church on that
same evening involved a good deal more than a mere
exchange of good-nights. Come now, I want to give
you the chance of making a statement, but I don’t
want to press you. If you would like to reserve your
replies until you have consulted your solicitor, by all
means do so. But in that case I shall have to take
you into custody.”</p>

<p>For some moments Whymper did not speak. He
seemed overcome by French’s words and unable to
reach a decision. French did not hurry him. He
had sized up his man and he believed he would
presently get his information. But at last, as Whymper
remained silent, he said more sternly:—</p>

<p>“Come now, Mr. Whymper, you’ll have to make
up your mind, you know.”</p>

<p>His words seemed to break the spell and
Whymper replied. He spoke earnestly and without any of
the evidences of prevarication which had marked his
previous statements. “The truth this time,” said
French to himself, and he settled down to listen,
thinking that if the other really had a satisfactory
explanation of his conduct, it was going to be worth
hearing.</p>

<p>“I wanted to keep this matter secret,” Whymper
began, “for quite personal reasons. The £500 you
speak of, of which the money I paid to Cook was a
part, was not stolen. It never occurred to me to
imagine I could be accused of stealing it. I don’t see
now what makes you think I did. However, I see
that I must tell you the truth so far as I can and I
may begin by admitting that what I have said up to
now was not the truth.”</p>

<p>French nodded in approval.</p>

<p>“That’s better, Mr. Whymper. I am glad you are
taking this line. Believe me, you will find it the best
for yourself.”</p>

<p>“I’m afraid I can’t take any credit for it. I
needn’t pretend I would have told you if I could
have helped myself. However, this is what
happened:—</p>

<p>“On that Wednesday evening of the fire, as I left
the church about half-past five, I saw Roper outside
the gate. He seemed to be waiting for me and he
came up and said he had a message for me from Mr.
Averill. Mr. Averill wasn’t very well or he would
have written, but he wanted to see me on very urgent
and secret business. Roper asked could I come out
that night to Starvel and see Mr. Averill, without
mentioning my visit to any one. I said I should be
out there shortly after eight o’clock, and we parted.”</p>

<p>Again French nodded. This was a good
beginning. So far it covered the facts.</p>

<p>“I walked out as I had promised. Roper opened
the door. He showed me into the drawing-room and
asked me to wait until he had informed Mr. Averill.
He was absent for several minutes and then he came
back to say that Mr. Averill was extremely sorry,
but he was feeling too ill to see me. He had,
however, written me a note, and Roper handed me a
bulky envelope.</p>

<p>“I was fairly surprised when I opened it for it
contained banknotes, and when I counted them I
was more surprised still. There were twenty-five of
them and they were all for £20: no less than £500
altogether. There was a note with them. I don’t
remember the exact words, but Mr. Averill said he
was sorry he was too unwell to undertake what must
be a painful interview, that he didn’t wish to put the
facts in writing, that Roper was entirely in his
confidence in the matter and would explain it, and that
as I should want money for what he was going to ask
me to do, he was enclosing £500, to which he would
add a further sum if I found I required it.</p>

<p>“Roper then went on to tell me a certain story. I
can only say that it is quite impossible for me to
repeat it, but it involved a visit to France. Mr. Averill
would have preferred to have gone himself, but he
was too old and frail, and he could not spare Roper.
He asked me would I undertake it for him. The
money was for my expenses, if I would go. The
matter was, however, very confidential, and this I
could see for myself.</p>

<p>“I agreed to go to France, and took the notes. I
left Starvel about half-past nine, and walked back to
my rooms. Next day came the news of the tragedy.
This put me in a difficulty as to the mission to
France. But I saw that my duty would be to go just
as if Mr. Averill was still alive. So I went, as you
seem to know, but I was unable to carry out the work
Mr. Averill had wished me to do. Instead,
therefore, of spending four or five hundred pounds as I
had expected to, the trip only cost me my travelling
expenses, and I was left with £480 of Mr. Averill’s
money on my hands. At first I thought I had better
hand it over to Mr. Oxley, Mr. Averill’s solicitor,
but afterwards I decided to keep it and go out again
to France and have another try at the business.”</p>

<p>French was puzzled by the story. It certainly
hung together and it certainly was consistent with all
the facts he had learned from other sources.
Moreover, Whymper’s manner was now quite different.
He spoke convincingly and French felt inclined to
believe him. On the other hand, all that he had said
could have been very easily invented. If he
persisted in his refusal to disclose his business in France,
French felt he could not officially accept his
statement.</p>

<p>“That may be all very well, Mr. Whymper,” he
said. “I admit that what you have told me may be
perfectly true. I am not saying whether I myself
believe it or not, but I will say this, that no jury on
the face of this earth would believe it. Moreover,
as it stands, your story cannot be tested. You must
tell the whole of it. You must say what was the
mission Mr. Averill asked you to undertake in France.
If I can satisfy myself about it there is no need for
any one else to know. Now, be advised, and since
you have gone so far, complete your statement.”</p>

<p>The hopeless look settled once more on
Whymper’s face.</p>

<p>“I’m sorry,” he said despondently. “I can’t. It’s
not my secret.”</p>

<p>“But Mr. Averill is now dead. That surely makes
a difference. Besides, it is impossible that he could
wish to get you into the most serious trouble any man
could be in because of even a criminal secret. Tell
me in confidence, Mr. Whymper. I’ll promise not to
use the information unless it is absolutely necessary.”</p>

<p>Whymper shook his head. “I can’t tell,” he
repeated.</p>

<p>French’s tone became a trifle sterner.</p>

<p>“I wonder if you quite understand the position.
It has been established that some person or persons
went to Starvel on the evening we are speaking of,
murdered Mr. Averill and Roper and his wife,”
Whymper gave an exclamation of dismay, “stole Mr.
Averill’s fortune and then set fire to the house. So
far as we know, you alone visited the house that
night, some of the stolen money was found in your
possession, and when I give you the chance of
accounting for your actions, you don’t take it. Do you
not understand, Mr. Whymper, that if you persist
in this foolish attitude you will be charged with
murder?”</p>

<p>Whymper’s face had become ghastly and an
expression of absolute horror appeared on his features.
For a moment he sat motionless, and then he looked
French straight in the face.</p>

<p>“It’s not my secret. I can’t tell you,” he declared
with a sudden show of energy and then sank back
into what seemed the lethargy of despair.</p>

<p>French was more puzzled than ever. The facts
looked as bad as possible, and yet if Whymper’s tale
were true, he might be absolutely innocent. And
French’s inclination was to believe the story so far
as it went. The secret might be something discreditable
affecting, not Mr. but Miss Averill, which would
account for the man’s refusal to reveal it. On the
other hand could Whymper be hiding information
about the Starvel crime? Was he even shielding the
murderer? Could he, learning what had occurred
and finding proof of the murderer’s identity, have
himself set fire to the house with the object of
destroying the evidence? Somehow, French did not
think he was himself the murderer, but if he knew
the identity of the criminal he was an accessory after
the fact and guilty to that extent.</p>

<p>Whether or not he should arrest the young man
was to French a problem which grew in difficulty the
longer he considered it. On the whole, he was
against it. If Whymper turned out to be innocent
such a step would, of course, be a serious blunder,
but even if he were guilty there were objections to it.
Arrest might prevent him from doing something by
which he would give himself away or at least indicate
the correct line of research. Free, but with arrest
hanging over him, the man would in all probability
attempt to communicate with his accomplice—if he
had one—and so give a hint of the latter’s identity.
French made up his mind.</p>

<p>“I have more than enough evidence to arrest you
now,” he said gravely, “but I am anxious first to put
your story to a further test. I will, therefore, for
the present only put you under police supervision.
If you can see your way to complete your statement,
I may be able to withdraw the supervision. By the
way, have you got the note Mr. Averill enclosed
with the £500?”</p>

<p>“Yes, it is in my rooms.”</p>

<p>“Then come along to your rooms now and give it
to me. You had better hand over the notes also, for
which, of course, I’ll give you a receipt. I shall also
want a photograph of yourself and a sample of your
handwriting.”</p>

<p>When French reached the hotel he took out
some samples of Mr. Averill’s handwriting which
he had obtained from Mr. Tarkington and
compared them with that of Whymper’s note. But he
saw at a glance that there was nothing abnormal
here. All were obviously by the same hand.</p>

<p>That evening after racking his brains over his
problem it was borne in on him that a visit to
Annecy was his only remaining move. It was not
hopeful, but as he put it to himself, you never knew. He
felt there was nothing more to be learned at Thirsby,
but he <em>might</em> find something at Annecy which would
give him a lead.</p>

<p>He saw Sergeant Kent and urged him to keep a
close watch on Whymper’s movements, then next
day he went up to town and put the case before
Chief Inspector Mitchell. That astute gentleman
smiled when he heard it.</p>

<p>“Another trip to the Continent, eh, French?” he
observed dryly. “Fond of foreign travel, aren’t
you?”</p>

<p>“It’s what you say, sir,” French answered,
considerably abashed. “I admit it’s not hopeful, but it’s
just a possibility. However, if you think it best I
shall go back to Thirsby, and——”</p>

<p>“Pulling your leg, French,” the Chief Inspector
broke in with a kindly smile. “I think you should
go to France. You mayn’t learn anything about
the tragedy, but you’re pretty certain to find out
Whymper’s business and either convict him or clear
him in your mind.”</p>

<p>That evening at 8.30 French left Victoria and
early next morning reached Paris. Crossing the city,
he bathed and breakfasted at the Gare de Lyon, and
taking the 8.10 a.m. express, spent the day watching
the great central plain of France roll past the
carriage windows. For an hour or two after starting
they skirted the Seine, a placid, well wooded stream
garnished with little towns and pleasant villas.
Then through the crumpled up country north of
Dijon and across more plains, past Bourg and
Amberieu and through the foothills of the Alps to
Culoz and Aix. At Aix French changed, completing
his journey on a little branch line and reaching
Annecy just in time for dinner. He drove to the
Splendid, where Whymper had stayed, a large hotel
looking out across a wide street at the side of which came
up what looked like a river, but which he afterwards
found was an arm of the lake. Scores of little boats
lay side by side at the steps along the road, and on
the opposite side of the water stood a great building
which he saw was the theatre, with behind it, the
trees of a park.</p>

<p>After dinner French asked for the manager, and
producing his photograph of Whymper, inquired if
any one resembling it had recently stayed at the
hotel. But yes, the manager remembered his guest’s
friend perfectly. He had stayed, he could not say
how long from memory, but he would consult the
register. Would monsieur be so amiable as to
follow him? Yes, here it was. M. Whymper?—was
it not so? M. Whymper had arrived on Friday the
8th of October and had stayed for three nights,
leaving on Monday the 11th. No, the manager
could not tell what his business had been nor how he
had employed his time. Doubtless he had gone on
the lake. To go on the lake was very agreeable.
All the hotel guests went on the lake. By steamer,
yes. You could go to the end of the lake in one hour,
and round it in between two and three. But yes! A
lake of the greatest beauty.</p>

<p>French had not expected to learn more than this
from the manager. He remembered that in his
original letter to Cook Whymper had asked for
Talloires, and he now spoke of the place. Talloires,
it appeared, was a small village on the east side of
the lake, rather more than half-way down. A
picturesque spot, the manager assured him, with no less
than three hotels. If monsieur wished to visit it he
should take the steamer. All the steamers called.</p>

<p>Next morning accordingly French took the
steamer from the pleasant little Quay alongside the
park. French thought the lake less lovely than that
of Thun, but still the scenery was very charming.
High hills rose up steeply from the water,
particularly along the eastern side, while towards the south
he could see across the ends of valleys snow peaks
hanging in the sky. Villas and little hamlets nestled
in the trees along the shore.</p>

<p>Right opposite the pier at Talloires was a big
hotel and there French, having ordered a drink,
began to make inquiries. But no one had seen the
original of the photograph, or recollected hearing a
name like Whymper.</p>

<p>Another large hotel was standing close by, and
French strolled towards it beneath a grove of fine
old trees which grew down to the water’s edge. This
hotel building had been a monastery and French
enjoyed sauntering through the old cloisters, which he
was told, formed the <i lang="fr">salle à manger</i> during the hot
weather.</p>

<p>Having done justice to an excellent <i lang="fr">dejeuner</i>, he
returned to business, producing his photograph and
asking his questions. And here he met with
immediate success. Both the waiter who attended him
and the manager remembered Whymper. The
young architect had, it appeared, asked to see the
manager and had inquired if he knew where in the
neighbourhood a M. Prosper Giraud had lived.
When the manager replied that no such person had
been there while he had been manager—over five
years—Whymper had been extremely disconcerted.
He had then asked if a Mme. Madeleine
Blancquart was known, and on again receiving a negative
reply, had been more upset than ever. He had left
after lunch and the manager had heard that he had
repeated his questions to the police.</p>

<p>In ten minutes French was at the local
gendarmerie, where he learned that not only had Whymper
made the same inquiries, but had offered a reward of
5000 francs for information as to the whereabouts
of either of the mysterious couple. Interrogations
on the same point had been received from the police
at Annecy, so presumably Whymper had visited
them also.</p>

<p>This supposition French confirmed on returning to
the little town. Whymper had made his inquiries
and offered his reward there also and had seemed
terribly disappointed by his failure to locate the
people. He had left his address and begged that if
either of the persons was heard of a wire should be
sent him immediately.</p>

<p>As French made his way back to London he felt
that in one sense his journey had not been wasted.
Whymper’s actions seemed on the whole to confirm
his story. French did not believe he would have had
the guile to travel out all that way, and to show such
feeling over a failure to find purely imaginary
people. He felt sure that M. Prosper Giraud and
Mme. Madeleine Blancquart did really exist and
that Mr. Averill had mentioned them. If
Whymper had invented these people he would have spoken
of them so that his inquiries might be discovered in
confirmation of his statement. If Whymper,
moreover, had had sufficient imagination to devise such a
story, he would certainly have had enough to
complete it in a convincing manner.</p>

<p>The more French considered the whole affair, the
more likely he thought it that there really was a
secret in the Averill family, a secret so important or
so sinister that Whymper was willing to chance
arrest rather than reveal it. And if so, it could
concern but one person. Surely for Ruth Averill alone
would the young man run such a risk. And then
French remembered that until the fire, that was, until
Whymper’s visit to Starvel, the courtship of the
young people had been going strong, whereas after
the tragedy the affair had seemed at a standstill.
There was some secret vitally affecting Ruth. French
felt he could swear it. And what form would such a
secret be likely to take? French determined that on
his return he would make some guarded inquiries as
to the girl’s parentage.</p>

<p>But when he reached London he found a fresh
development had taken place, and his thoughts for
some time to come were led into a completely new
channel.</p>

</div>

<div class="chapter" id="ch07">

<h2>CHAPTER SEVEN: Posthumous Evidence</h2>

<p>The cause of Inspector French’s change of
outlook on the Starvel case was a note from Sergeant
Kent which was waiting for him on his arrival at
Scotland Yard. The sergeant wrote enclosing a
letter addressed to “The Heirs or Assigns of the
late Mr. John Roper, Starvel, Thirsby, Yorkshire,
W.R.” The postmaster, he explained, had shown it
to him, asking him if he knew to whom it should be
forwarded. Though he did not suppose it could
have anything to do with the tragedy, the sergeant
thought that French should see it.</p>

<p>“No good,” French thought. “Nothing to me.”
Nevertheless he slit open the envelope and withdrew
the contents.</p>

<p>It was a letter headed “The Metropolitan Safe
Deposit Co., Ltd., 25b King William Street, City,”
and read as follows:—</p>

<p>“<span class="name">Dear Sir or Madam,</span>—We beg to remind you
that the late Mr. John Roper of Starvel, Thirsby,
Yorkshire, W.R., was the holder of a small safe in
our strongrooms. The rent of the safe, 30/- (thirty
shillings stg.) is now due, and we should be glad to
receive this sum from you or alternatively to have
your instructions as to disposal of its contents.</p>

<p class="centered">“Yours faithfully,</p>
<p class="signature">“For <span class="name">The Metropolitan Safe Deposit Co.,
Ltd.</span>”</p>

<p>To French it seemed a rather unusual thing that a
man in Roper’s position should require the services
of a safe deposit company. He could not but feel a
certain curiosity regarding the object which required
such careful guarding. As things were he supposed
he had as much right as anybody to deal with the
affair, and as it was but a short distance to King
William Street, he decided he would go down and
investigate.</p>

<p>Half an hour later he was explaining the position
to the manager. As far as was known, Roper had
no relatives or heirs. His safe would therefore be
given up, and on behalf of Scotland Yard, he,
French, would take charge of its contents.</p>

<p>The contents in question proved to be a small
sealed envelope, and when French had once again
reached the seclusion of his own office he tore it open
and ran his eye over its enclosure. As he did so his
eyes grew round and he gave vent to a low, sustained
whistle. To say that he was at that moment the
most astonished man in London would be a very
inadequate description of his sensations.</p>

<p>The enclosure consisted of a single sheet of gray
note paper with an address, “Braeside, Kintillock,
Fife,” printed in small embossed letters at the top.
One side was covered with writing, a man’s hand,
cultivated, but somewhat tremulous. It read:—</p>

<blockquote><div>

<p class="dateline">15<i>th</i> <i>May</i>, 1921.</p>
<p>“I, Herbert Philpot, doctor of medicine and at
present assistant on the staff of the Ransome
Institute in this town, under compulsion and in the
hope of avoiding exposure, hereby remorsefully
confess that I am guilty of attempting the death of my
wife, Edna Philpot, by arranging that she should
meet with an accident, and when this merely
rendered her unconscious, of killing her by striking her
on the temple with a cricket bat. I do not state my
overwhelming sorrow and despair, for these are
beyond words.</p>

<p>“May God have mercy on me,</p>
<p class="signature">“<span class="name">Herbert Philpot</span>.”</p>

</div></blockquote>

<p>French swore in amazement as he read this
extraordinary document. Dr. Herbert Philpot! Surely
that was the Thirsby doctor? He turned to his notes
of the case. Yes, the name was Herbert all right.
Presumably it was the same man. At all events it
would be easy to find out.</p>

<p>But what under the sun did the document mean?
Was it really a statement of fact, a genuine
confession of murder, written by Philpot? If so, how had
it fallen into the hands of Roper, and what had the
man been keeping it for? Had he been
blackmailing Philpot? Or was the whole thing a forgery?
French was completely puzzled.</p>

<p>But it was evident that the matter could not be
left where it stood. It must be gone into and its
monstrous suggestion must be proved or rebutted.</p>

<p>French’s hand stole toward his pocket and half
unconsciously he filled and lit his pipe, puffing out
clouds of blue smoke while he thought over this
latest development. <em>If</em> the confession were genuine
and <em>if</em> Roper were blackmailing Philpot, Philpot
would want to get rid of Roper. Could it therefore
be possible that Philpot was in some way mixed up
with the Starvel crime? Not personally of course;
there was medical evidence that the doctor was ill
in bed at the time of the tragedy. But could he be
involved in some way that French could not at the
moment fathom? It seemed too far-fetched to
consider seriously, and yet here was undoubtedly a
connection with Roper of the most extraordinary kind.</p>

<p>But this was sheer idiocy! French pulled himself
together. An inspector of his service ought to know
better than to jump to conclusions! Hadn’t bitter
experience again and again taught him its folly?
Let him get hold of his data first.</p>

<p>And then French recalled the statement of the
landlord of the Thirsdale Arms in Thirsby. He had
taken all that the landlord had said with a grain of
salt—gossips were seldom entirely reliable—but if
Philpot <em>had</em> been gambling to the extent of
embarrassing himself financially. . . . It was worth
looking into anyway.</p>

<p>Obviously the first thing was to make sure that
the Philpot of the confession really was the Thirsby
doctor. This at least was easy. He sent for a
medical directory and traced the Thirsby man’s
career. A few seconds gave him his information.</p>

<p>Herbert Philpot was born in 1887, making him
now 39 years old. He passed through Edinburgh
University, taking his final in 1909. For a year he
was at sea and for two more years he worked in one
of the Edinburgh hospitals. In 1913 he was
appointed junior assistant at the Ransome Institution
at Kintilloch, where he remained for eight years.
In September 1921—four months after the date of
the confession, French noted—he set up for
himself in Thirsby.</p>

<p>So that was that. French’s interest grew as he
considered the matter. If the confession were
genuine, the affair would be something in the nature
of a scoop, not only for himself personally, but even
for the great organisation of the Yard. It would
create a first-class sensation. The powers that be
would be pleased and certain kudos and possible
promotion would be forthcoming.</p>

<p>French left the Yard and drove to the office of
<i>The Scotsman</i> in Fleet Street. There he asked to
see the files of the paper for the year 1921, and
turning to the month of May, he began a search for
news of an accident to a Mrs. Philpot at Kintilloch.</p>

<p>He found it sooner than he had expected. On the
17th May, two days after the date of the confession,
there was a short paragraph headed “Tragic Death
of a Doctor’s Wife.” It read:—</p>

<blockquote><div>

<p>“The little town of Kintilloch, Fife, has been
thrown into mourning by the tragic death on
Tuesday evening of Mrs. Edna Philpot, wife of Dr.
Herbert Philpot, one of the staff of the Ransome
Institute. The deceased lady in some way tripped while
descending the stairs at her home, falling down the
lower flight. Dr. Philpot, who was in his study,
heard her cry and rushed out to find her lying
unconscious in the hall. She was suffering from severe
concussion and in spite of all his efforts she passed
away in a few minutes, even before the arrival of
Dr. Ferguson, for whom Dr. Philpot had hurriedly
telephoned. Mrs. Philpot took a prominent part in
the social life of the town and her loss will be keenly
felt.”</p>

</div></blockquote>

<p>“It’s suggestive enough,” French thought, as he
copied out the paragraph. “It looks as if she had
been alone with him in the house. I must get more
details.”</p>

<p>He returned to the Yard and put through a
telephone call to the Detective Department of the
Edinburgh police, asking that any information about
the accident be sent him as soon as possible.</p>

<p>While he was waiting for a reply his thoughts
reverted to Whymper. He was rather troubled in his
mind about the young architect. While he was now
strongly inclined to believe in his innocence, he was
still not certain of it, and he hesitated upon starting
off on this new inquiry until he had made up his
mind definitely about the other matter. But some
further thought showed him that there was no
special reason for coming to an immediate decision
about Whymper. Sergeant Kent was keeping him
under police supervision and might well continue
to do so for a day or two more.</p>

<p>Two days later French received a voluminous
dossier of the case from the authorities in Scotland.
There were cuttings from several papers as well as
three columns from the <i>Kintilloch Weekly Argus</i>.
There was a detailed report from the local sergeant
embodying a short history of all concerned, and a
copy of Dr. Ferguson’s certificate of “death from
concussion, resulting from a fall.” Finally there was
a covering letter from the head of the department,
marked “confidential,” which stated that, owing to
some dissatisfaction in the mind of the local
superintendent, the matter had been gone into more fully
than might otherwise have been the case, but that
this inquiry having evolved no suspicious
circumstances, the affair had been dropped.</p>

<p>Considerably impressed and beginning to think he
was on a hot scent, French settled down to study the
documents in detail. And the more he did so, the
more determined he became that he would sift the
affair to the bottom. Apart from the possible
murder of Mrs. Philpot and the bringing of her
murderer to justice, he saw that if such a crime had been
committed it might have a very important bearing
on the Starvel tragedy. Roper might have been
blackmailing Philpot, and though he did not see how,
Philpot might have some association with the crime.
Therefore, from two points of view it was his duty
to carry on.</p>

<p>By the time he had read all the papers twice he
had a very good idea in his mind of what at least was
supposed to have taken place. Dr. Philpot was
third in command on the medical staff of the
Ransome Institute, a large mental hospital about a mile
from Kintilloch, a small town in Fifeshire. He was
a man of retiring disposition, neither popular nor
exactly unpopular, and pulling but a small weight in
the public and social affairs of the little township.
In May 1914 he had married Miss Edna Menzies,
the daughter of the manager of a large factory near
Dundee. Miss Menzies was a pretty young woman
with a vivacious manner and was a general
favourite, particularly among the athletic and sporting sets
of the community.</p>

<p>The Philpots, who had no children, lived at
Braeside, a small detached house some half-mile
from the town and a few hundred yards from the
gate of the Ransome Institute. The only other
member of the household was a general servant, Flora
Macfarlane, who had been with them for over three
years at the date of the tragedy and who was
believed to be an efficient servant. But she was “ay
one for the lads,” as the local gossips expressed it,
and though the breath of scandal had so far passed
her by, dark hints were given and heads shaken
when her doings came under review.</p>

<p>This girl, Flora, lived only a short distance from
Braeside. For some weeks before the tragedy her
mother had been ailing, and she had formed the
habit of running over to see her for a few minutes
when her duties permitted. About 5.30 on the
afternoon of the accident she had asked and obtained
permission to make one of these visits, undertaking
to be back in time to prepare dinner. This would
normally have meant an absence of about half an
hour. But as the girl left a heavy shower came on,
with the result that, after sheltering under a tree
for a few minutes, she abandoned her purpose and
returned to the house some fifteen minutes earlier
than she had expected. Braeside is built on sloping
ground, the hall door being level with the road in
front while the basement kitchen has an independent
entrance to the lower ground behind. Flora used
this lower entrance, and as she passed through she
heard Dr. Philpot speaking in a loud and agitated
voice. Something in the sound suggested disaster
and she ran up the back stairs to the hall to see if
anything was wrong. There she found Mrs.
Philpot lying on the floor at the foot of the stairs,
motionless and the colour of death. As a matter of
fact the lady was then dead, though Flora did not
know this until later. Dr. Philpot, with an
appearance of extreme anguish and despair, was
telephoning for help. His call made, he put down the
receiver and then, noticing the girl, cried: “She’s dead,
Flora! She’s dead! She has fallen downstairs and
been killed!” He was terribly upset and indeed
seemed hardly sane for some hours. Presently Dr.
Ferguson, the senior medical officer of the Institute,
arrived and a few minutes later Sergeant
MacGregor of the local police.</p>

<p>Dr. Philpot afterwards explained that he was
writing letters in his study when he heard a sudden
scream from his wife and a terrible noise like that of
a body falling down the stairs. He rushed out to
find Mrs. Philpot lying in a heap at the bottom of
the lower flight. She was unconscious and a large
contusion on her temple showed that she had struck
her head heavily on the floor. He laid her on her
back and tried everything that his knowledge
suggested to bring her round, but it was evident that she
had been fatally injured and in a minute or two she
was dead. The doctor had been so busy attending to
her that he had not had a moment to summon aid,
but directly he saw that all was over he telephoned
for his chief and the police.</p>

<p>The lower flight consisted of sixteen steps. At the
top was a small landing. On this the stair carpet
was worn and there was a tiny hole. After the
tragedy the edge of this hole next the lower flight
was found to be raised and torn. That, coupled with
the fact that the deceased lady was wearing very
high-heeled shoes, suggested the theory that she had
met her death by catching her heel in the carpet
while descending the stairs.</p>

<p>Such was the gist of the story as understood by
French. He thought it over in some doubt,
considering it from various angles. The tale certainly
hung together, and there was nothing impossible in
it. Everything indeed might well have taken place
exactly as described, and French felt that had he not
known of the confession, no suspicion of foul play
would have entered his mind. But in the light of
the confession he saw that the events might bear
another interpretation. Philpot was alone with his
wife at the time of the occurrence; and he probably
knew beforehand that he would be alone, that Flora
had obtained half an hour’s leave of absence. When
Flora returned Mrs. Philpot was dead. There was
no witness of the accident. No one other than
Philpot knew how the lady died. To have staged the
accident would have been easy, and a blow on the
temple with some heavy weapon such as a cricket
bat would have produced a bruise similar to that
caused by a fall. Moreover, a resourceful man could
have produced the suggestion that she had tripped
by deliberately raising the edge of the carpet at the
hole. Yes, it could all have been done exactly as
the confession suggested.</p>

<p>Were these the considerations, French wondered,
which had caused the dissatisfaction in the mind of
the local superintendent, or were there still further
circumstances throwing suspicion on Philpot?
Whether or not, he felt the case against the doctor
was strong enough to justify a visit to Kintilloch.</p>

<p>But one point—a vital one—he could settle
before starting, or so he believed. Walking down
the Embankment to Charing Cross, he went to the
writing room of the station hotel and wrote a letter
on the hotel paper.</p>

<blockquote><div>

<p class="dateline">“5<i>th</i> <i>November</i>.</p>
<p>“<span class="name">Dear Sir,</span>—I should be grateful if you would
kindly inform me if a man named Henry Fuller ever
worked for you as gardener, and if so, whether you
found him satisfactory. He has applied to me for a
job, giving you as a reference.</p>
<p>“Apologising for troubling you,</p>
<p class="centered">“Yours faithfully,</p>
<p class="signature">“<span class="name">Charles Musgrave</span>.”</p>

</div></blockquote>

<p>French addressed his letter to “Herbert Philpot,
Esq., M.D., Thirsby, Yorkshire, W.R.” and
dropping it into the hotel letter box, returned to the
Yard.</p>

<p>Two days later he called for the reply, explaining
to the porter that he had intended to stay in the
hotel but had had to change his plans. Dr. Philpot
wrote briefly that there must be some mistake, as
no one of the name mentioned had ever worked for
him.</p>

<p>But French was not interested in the career of the
hypothetical Henry Fuller. Instead he laid the
letter down on his desk beside the confession and with
a powerful lens fell to comparing the two.</p>

<p>He was soon satisfied. The confession was a
forgery. The lens revealed a shakiness in the
writing due to slow and careful formation of the letters
which would not have been there had it been
written at an ordinary speed. French had no doubt on
the matter, but to make assurance doubly sure he
sent the two documents to the Yard experts for a
considered opinion. Before long he had their reply.
His conclusion was correct, an enlarged photograph
proved it conclusively.</p>

<p>But even if the confession were forged, French
felt that the circumstances were so extraordinary
that he could not drop the matter. The whole affair
smacked of blackmail, and if blackmail had been
going on he thought it might in some way have a
bearing on the Starvel tragedy. At all events, even
though a forgery, the confession might state the
truth. It seemed necessary, therefore, to learn all
he could about the affair and he went in and laid
the whole matter before his Chief for that officer’s
decision.</p>

<p>Chief Inspector Mitchell was surprised by the
story.</p>

<p>“It’s certainly puzzling,” he admitted. “If the
document were genuine one could understand it a
bit. It’s possible, though it’s not easy, to imagine
circumstances under which it might have been
written. It might, for example, be that Roper had proof
of the doctor’s guilt, which he held back on getting
the confession to enable him to extort continuous
blackmail. Even in this case, however, it’s difficult
to see why he couldn’t have blackmailed on the proof
he already held. But none of these theories can be
the truth because the document is not genuine. A
forged confession is useless. Why then should
Roper value it sufficiently to store it in a safe
deposit? I confess it gets me, French, and I agree
that you should go into it further. I don’t see
that it will help you in any way with the Starvel
affair, but you never know. Something useful for
that too may come out. Say nothing to Philpot in
the meantime, but get away to this place in Scotland
and make a few inquiries.”</p>

<p>That night French took the 11.40 sleeping car
express from King’s Cross. He changed at
Edinburgh next morning and, having breakfasted,
continued his journey into Fifeshire in a stopping train.
Eleven o’clock saw him at Cupar, the headquarters
of the Kintilloch district, and fifteen minutes later
he was seated in the office of the superintendent,
explaining to that astonished officer the surprising
development which had taken place.</p>

<p>“They told me from Headquarters that you were
not satisfied about the affair when it occurred,”
French concluded. “I wondered if you would tell
me why?”</p>

<p>“I will surely,” the other returned, leaning
forward confidentially, “but you’ll understand that we
hadn’t what you’d call an actual suspicion. There
was, first of all, the fact that it wasn’t a very
common kind of accident. I’ve heard of an occasional
person falling downstairs, but I’ve never heard of
any one being killed by it. Then there was nobody
there when it happened except Philpot: there was
no one to check his statement. What’s more, he
knew the servant was going out. The girl’s
statement was that Mrs. Philpot was with the doctor in
the study when she asked permission to go. It all
looked possible, you understand. But the thing that
really started us wondering was that the Philpots
were supposed to be on bad terms, and it was
whispered that Philpot was seeing a good deal of one
of the nurses up at the Institute. It’s only fair to
say that we couldn’t prove either of these rumors.
The only definite things we got hold of were that
the Philpots never went anywhere together, Mrs.
Philpot being socially inclined and he not, and that
he and the nurse were seen one day lunching in a
small hotel in Edinburgh. But of course there was
nothing really suspicious in these things and the rest
may have been just gossip. In any case he didn’t
marry the nurse. The talk made us look into the
affair, but we thought it was all right and we let it
drop.”</p>

<p>French nodded. The superintendent’s statement
was comprehensive and he did not at first see what
more there was to be learned. But he sat on,
turning the thing over in his mind, in his competent,
unhurried way, until he had thought out and put in
order a number of points upon which further
information might be available.</p>

<p>“I suppose that other doctor—Ferguson, you
called him—was quite satisfied by the accident
theory?”</p>

<p>“Sergeant MacGregor asked him that, as a
routine question. Yes, there was no doubt the blow on
the temple killed her and in his opinion she might
have received it by falling down the stairs.”</p>

<p>“And the servant girl had no suspicion?”</p>

<p>“Well, we didn’t exactly ask her that in so many
words. But I’m satisfied she hadn’t. Besides, her
story was all right. There was nothing to cause
her suspicion—if she was telling the truth.”</p>

<p>“Is she still in the town?”</p>

<p>“I don’t know,” the superintendent returned. “I
have an idea that she married shortly afterwards
and left. But Sergeant MacGregor will know.
Would you have time to go down to Kintilloch and
see him? I could go with you to-morrow, but I’m
sorry I’m engaged for the rest of to-day.”</p>

<p>“Thank you, I’d like to see the sergeant, but I
shouldn’t think of troubling you to come. I think
indeed I shall have to see all concerned. It’s a
matter of form really; I don’t expect to get anything
more than your people did. But I’m afraid I shall
have to see them to satisfy the Chief. You see, there
may be some connection with this Starvel case that
I’m on. You don’t mind?”</p>

<p>“Of course not. I’ll give you a note to
MacGregor. These country bumpkins become jealous
easily.”</p>

<p>“Thank you. I think there’s only one other thing
I should like to ask you, and that’s about Roper.
Do you know anything of him?”</p>

<p>“I don’t, but he might have lived at Kintilloch all
his life for all that. I don’t know the local people
very well. The sergeant will help you there. He
is a useful man for his job—a shrewd gossip.
There’s not much happens in his district that he
doesn’t know about.”</p>

<p>A short run in a local train brought French to
Kintilloch and he was not long in finding the local
police station and introducing himself to Sergeant
MacGregor. That worthy at first displayed a canny
reserve, but on seeing his superintendent’s note
became loquacious and informative. With the
exception of two pieces of information, he had little to
tell of which French was not already aware. Those
two items, however, were important.</p>

<p>The first was that he had known John Roper
well. Roper had been for six years an attendant
at the Ransome Institute. He had been, the
sergeant believed, directly under Dr. Philpot. At all
events he and the doctor knew each other intimately.
As to the man’s character; MacGregor knew
nothing against him, but he had not liked him, nor
indeed had many other people. Roper was an able
man, clever and efficient, but he had a sneering,
satirical manner and was unable to refrain from
making caustic remarks which hurt people’s
feelings and made him enemies. He left his job and the
town some three or four years after Dr. Philpot as
a result of trouble at the Institute, and so far as the
sergeant could tell, no one was very sorry to see the
last of him. The sergeant had supposed he had
gone to Brazil, as he had applied for a passport for
that country. He had informed the sergeant that
he had a brother in Santos and was going out to
him.</p>

<p>The second piece of news was that Flora
Macfarlane, the Philpots’ maid, had been married a month
or so after Mrs. Philpot’s death, and to no less a
person than John Roper. The girl who had all but
witnessed her mistress’ tragic death had herself five
years later been a victim in that still more terrible
tragedy at the old house in Starvel Hollow.</p>

<p>As French shortly afterwards walked up the long
curving drive of the Ransome Institute, he felt that
he was progressing. He was getting connections
which were binding the isolated incidents of this
strange episode into a single whole, and if that
whole was not yet completely intelligible, he hoped
and believed it soon would be. There was first of
all the confession. He had started with the
confession as a single fact, connected incomprehensibly
with Roper through the medium of possession, but
not connected with Philpot at all. Now the
connection between Roper and Philpot had been
demonstrated. Roper had first-hand information about
the doctor from their respective positions on the
staff of the Institute, and he had as good as
first-hand information about the doctor’s household from
the girl he afterwards married. It all looked bad.
Every further fact discovered increased the
probability that Roper was blackmailing Philpot, and
that the confession was a true statement of what
had happened.</p>

<p>French’s interview with Dr. Ferguson was
disappointing. He asked first about Roper and received
very much the same information that Sergeant
MacGregor had given him. Roper had been attendant
to an invalid gentleman, a great traveller, with
whom he had been over most of Europe and
America. On the invalid’s death he had applied for a
job at the Ransome. He was a fully qualified
nurse, very intelligent and efficient, but he had not
been personally liked. He seemed rather inhuman
and did not mind whom he offended with his sharp
tongue. He was, however, good with the patients,
except for one thing. On two occasions he had been
found giving troublesome patients unauthorised
drugs to keep them quiet. The first case was not a
bad one, and on promising amendment, he was let
off with a caution. When the second case was
discovered he was immediately dismissed. He had not
asked for, nor been given, a discharge.</p>

<p>Anxious to see whether Roper’s handwriting
contained any idiosyncrasies which had been reproduced
in the forged documents, French with some difficulty
obtained some old forms which he had filled up.
These he put in his pocket for future study.</p>

<p>He then turned the conversation to Philpot. But
he was here on difficult ground and had to be very
wary and subtle in his questions. Between doctors,
he knew, there is a considerable freemasonry, and
he felt sure that if Ferguson imagined Philpot was
suspected of murder, he would take steps to put him
on his guard; not in any way to take the part of a
murderer, but to see that a colleague in trouble had
a fair chance. That Philpot should get any hint of
his suspicions was the last thing French wanted, as
he hoped the man’s surprise at an unexpected
question would force him into an involuntary admission
of guilt.</p>

<p>At all events Ferguson told him nothing about
Philpot that he had not known before. He asked
and obtained permission to interrogate a number of
the staff who remembered the two men, but from
none of these did he learn anything new about
either.</p>

<p>He could see nothing for it, therefore, but to
interview Philpot forthwith, and returning to the
station, he caught the last train to Edinburgh.
There he stayed the night, and next day took a train
which brought him through the Border country to
Carlisle and thence in due course to Hellifield and
Thirsby.</p>

</div>

<div class="chapter" id="ch08">

<h2>CHAPTER EIGHT: Dr. Philpot’s Story</h2>

<p>Doctor Philpot lived in a small detached house
at the end of the High Street of the little town,
close enough to the centre of things to be
convenient for patients, and far enough away to have a
strip of garden round his house and to avoid being
overlooked by his neighbours.</p>

<p>The reply to the letter he had written from
“Charles Musgrave” about the mythical gardener
told French that the doctor’s consulting hours were
from six to eight o’clock in the evening, and at two
minutes to eight on the day he had returned from
Edinburgh French rang the doctor’s bell. The door
was opened by an elderly woman who led the way
to the consulting room.</p>

<p>There seemed to French a vaguely unprosperous
air about the place. The garden was untended, the
railing wanted paint and the house, while well
enough furnished, looked neglected and dirty.
French wondered if these were the outward and
visible signs of the betting proclivities of their owner,
of which the hotel landlord had taken so serious a
view.</p>

<p>Dr. Philpot was seated at a writing table, but he
rose on French’s entry. His appearance was not
exactly unprepossessing, but it suggested a lack of
force or personality. Physically he was frail, neither
tall nor short, and washed out as to colouring. His
tired, dreamy-looking eyes were of light blue, his
fair hair, thinning on the top, was flecked with gray
and his complexion had an almost unhealthy pallor.
He had well-formed, rather aristocratic features,
but his expression was bored and dissatisfied. He
struck French as a dreamer rather than a practical
man of affairs. But his manner was polite enough
as he wished his visitor good-evening and pointed
to a chair.</p>

<p>“I have called, Dr. Philpot, not as a patient,
but to consult you on a small matter of
business.”</p>

<p>Dr. Philpot glanced at the clock on the marble
chimney piece.</p>

<p>“It is just eight,” he answered. “I shall not have
any more patients to-night. I am quite at your
service.”</p>

<p>French sat down and made a remark or two about
the weather, while he watched the man opposite to
him keenly but unobtrusively. He was playing for
time in which to ascertain what manner of man
this doctor really was, so that he might handle the
interview in the way most likely to achieve its end.
Philpot replied politely but shortly, evidently at a
loss to know why his visitor could not come to the
point. But French presently did so with surprising
suddenness.</p>

<p>“I am sorry, Dr. Philpot, that I am here on very
unpleasant business, and I must begin by telling
you that I am a detective inspector from New
Scotland Yard.”</p>

<p>As he spoke French made no secret of his keen
scrutiny. His eyes never left the other’s face, and
he felt the thrill of the hunter when he noticed a
sudden change come over its expression. From
inattentive and bored it now became watchful and
wary, and the man’s figure seemed to stiffen as if
he were bracing himself to meet a shock.</p>

<p>“I regret to say,” French proceeded, “that
information has recently been received by the Yard
which, if true, would indicate that you are guilty
of a very serious crime, and I have to warn you
that if you are unable to offer me a satisfactory
explanation I may have to arrest you, in which case
anything which you may now say may be used in
evidence against you.”</p>

<p>French was deeply interested by the other’s
reception of this speech. Dr. Philpot’s face was showing
extreme apprehension, not to say actual fear. This
was not altogether unexpected—French had seen
apprehension stamped on many a face under similar
circumstances. But what was unexpected was that
the doctor should show no surprise. He seemed
indeed to take French’s statement for granted, as
if a contingency which he had long expected had
at last arisen. “He knows what is coming,” French
thought as he paused for the other to speak.</p>

<p>But Philpot did not speak. Instead he
deliberately raised his eyebrows, and looking inquiringly
at French, waited for him to continue. French
remained silent for a moment or two, then leaning
forward and staring into the other’s eyes, he said
in a low tone: “Dr. Philpot, you are accused of
murdering your wife, Edna Philpot, at your home
at Braeside, Kintilloch, about 5.30 on the afternoon
of the 15th May, 1921.”</p>

<p>The doctor started and paled. For a moment
panic seemed about to overtake him, then he pulled
himself together.</p>

<p>“Ridiculous!” he declared coolly. “Your
information must be capable of some other explanation.
What does it consist of?”</p>

<p>“It purports to be the statement of an
eyewitness,” French returned, continuing slowly: “It
mentions—among other things—it mentions—a cricket
bat.”</p>

<p>Again Philpot’s start indicated that the shot had
told, but he answered steadily:—</p>

<p>“A cricket bat? I don’t follow. What has a
cricket bat to do with it?”</p>

<p>“Everything,” French said grimly: “if the
information received is correct, of course.”</p>

<p>Philpot turned and faced him.</p>

<p>“Look here,” he said harshly, “will you say right
out what you mean and be done with it? Are you
accusing me of murdering my wife with a cricket
bat, or what are you trying to get at?”</p>

<p>“I’ll tell you,” French rejoined. “The statement
is that you arranged the—‘accident’—which befell
your wife. The ‘accident,’ however, did not kill
her, as you hoped and intended, and you then struck
her on the temple with a cricket bat, which did kill
her. That, I say, is the statement. I have just
been to Kintilloch and have been making inquiries.
Now, Dr. Philpot, when I mentioned the cricket
bat you started. You therefore realised its
significance. Do you care to give me an explanation
or would you prefer to reserve your statement until
you have consulted a solicitor?”</p>

<p>Dr. Philpot grew still paler as he sat silent, lost in
thought.</p>

<p>“Do you mean that you will arrest me if I don’t
answer your questions?”</p>

<p>“I shall have no alternative.”</p>

<p>Again the doctor considered while his eyes grew
more sombre and his expression more hopeless. At
last he seemed to come to a decision. He spoke
in a low voice.</p>

<p>“Ask your questions and I’ll answer them if I
can.”</p>

<p>French nodded.</p>

<p>“Did you ever,” he said slowly, “admit to any
one that you had committed this murder?”</p>

<p>Philpot looked at him in surprise.</p>

<p>“Never!” he declared emphatically.</p>

<p>“Then how,” French went on, slapping the
confession down on the table, “how did you come to
write this?”</p>

<p>Philpot stared at the document as if his eyes would
start out of his head. His face expressed
incredulous amazement, but here again French, who was
observing him keenly, felt his suspicions grow.
Philpot was surprised at the production of the paper;
it was impossible to doubt the reality of his
emotion. But he did not read it. He evidently
recognised it and knew its contents. For a moment he
gazed breathlessly, then he burst out with a bitter
oath.</p>

<p>“The infernal scoundrel!” he cried furiously. “I
knew he was bad, but this is more than I could have
imagined! That——Roper is at the bottom of this,
I’ll swear! It’s another of his hellish tricks!”</p>

<p>“What do you mean?” French asked. “Explain
yourself.”</p>

<p>“You got that paper from Roper—somehow,
didn’t you?” The man was speaking eagerly now.
“Even after he’s dead his evil genius remains.”</p>

<p>“If after my warning you care to make a
statement, I will hear it attentively, and you will have
every chance to clear yourself. As I told you I
have learned about the case from various sources.
I retain that knowledge to check your statement.”</p>

<p>Philpot made a gesture as if casting prudence to
the winds.</p>

<p>“I’ll tell you everything; I have no option,” he
said, and his manner grew more eager. “It means
admitting actions which I hoped never to have to
speak of again. But I can’t help myself. I don’t
know whether you’ll believe my story, but I will
tell you everything exactly as it happened.”</p>

<p>“I am all attention, Dr. Philpot.”</p>

<p>The doctor paused for a moment as if to collect
his thoughts, then still speaking eagerly though more
calmly, he began:—</p>

<p>“As you have inquired into this terrible affair,
you probably know a good deal of what I am going
to tell you. However, lest you should not have
heard all, I shall begin at the beginning.</p>

<p>“In the year 1913 I was appointed assistant on
the medical staff of the Ransome Institute. One of
the attendants there was called Roper, John Roper:
the John Roper who lost his life at Starvel some
weeks ago. He was a sneering, cynical man with
an outwardly correct manner, but when he wished
to be nasty, with a very offensive turn of phrase.
He was under my immediate supervision and we fell
foul of each other almost at once.</p>

<p>“One day, turning a corner in one of the corridors
I came on Roper with his arms round one of the
nurses. Whether she was encouraging him or not
I could not tell, but when he saw me he let her go
and she instantly vanished. I spoke to him sharply
and said I would report him. I should have been
warned by his look of hate, but he spoke civilly and
quietly.</p>

<p>“ ‘I have nothing to say about myself,’ he said,
‘but you’ll admit that Nurse Williams is a good
nurse, and well conducted. I happen to know she
is supporting her mother, and if she gets the sack
it will be ruin to both of them.’</p>

<p>“I told him he should have considered that earlier,
but when I thought over the affair I felt sorry for
the girl. She was, as he had said, a thoroughly
attentive, kindly girl, and a good nurse. Well, not
to make too long a story, there I made my mistake.
I showed weakness and I made no report.”</p>

<p>Philpot had by this time mastered his emotion
and now he was speaking quietly and collectedly,
though with an earnestness that carried conviction.</p>

<p>“But though I hadn’t reported him, Roper from
that moment hated me. He was outwardly polite,
but I could see the hatred in his eyes. I, on my
part, grew short with him. We never spoke
except on business and as little as possible on that.
But all the time he was watching for his revenge.</p>

<p>“In May, 1914, I married and set up house at
Braeside. Then came the war and in ’15 I joined
up. After two years I was invalided out and went
back to Kintilloch. Roper, I should say, was
exempted from service owing to a weak heart.</p>

<p>“On my return after that two years I was a
different man. I am not pleading neurasthenia, though
I suffered from shell-shock, but I had no longer the
self-control of my former days. Though I still
dearly loved my wife, I confess I felt strongly
attracted to other women when in their company.
Thus it happened—I don’t want to dwell on a
painful subject—that I, in my turn, became guilty of the
very offence for which I had threatened to report
Roper.” He spoke with an obvious effort. “There
was a nurse there—I need not tell you her name:
she’s not there now—but she was a pretty girl with
a kindly manner. I met her accidentally in
Edinburgh and on the spur of the moment asked her to
lunch. From that our acquaintance ripened and
at last, by Fate’s irony—well, Roper found her
in my arms one evening in a deserted part of the
Institute shrubbery. I can never forget his satanic
smile as he stood there looking at us. I sent the
girl away and then he disclosed his terms. The price
of his silence was ten shillings a week. If I would
pay him ten shillings a week he would forget what
he had seen.</p>

<p>“Well, just consider my position. The incident
was harmless in itself and yet its publication would
have been my ruin. As you probably know, in such
institutions that sort of thing is very severely dealt
with. If Roper had reported me to the authorities
my resignation would have followed as a matter of
course. And it was not I alone who would have
suffered. The nurse would probably have had to go.
My wife also had to be considered. I needn’t
attempt to justify myself, but I took the coward’s way
and agreed to Roper’s terms.</p>

<p>“Then there was triumph on his evil face and
he saw that he had me. With outward civility and
veiled insolence he said that while my word was as
good to him as my bond, the matter was a business
one, and should be settled in a business way. To
ensure continued payment he must have a guarantee.
The guarantee was to take the form of a statement
written and signed by myself, stating—but I can
remember its exact words. It was to say:—</p>

<p>“ ‘I, Herbert Philpot, doctor of medicine and at
present assistant on the staff of the Ransome
Institute in this town, under compulsion and in the
hope of avoiding exposure, hereby admit that I have
been carrying on an intrigue with Nurse So-and-so
of the same institution. I further admit unseemly
conduct with her in the grounds of the Ransome
Institute on the evening of this 2nd October, 1920,
though I deny any serious impropriety.’ ”</p>

<p>Philpot was now speaking in low tones with every
appearance of shame and distress, as if the memory
of these events and the putting of them into words
was acutely painful to him. His manner was
convincing, and French felt that the story, at least so
far, might well be true.</p>

<p>“You can’t think less of me than I do of myself,
Inspector, when I tell you that at last after a protest
and a long argument I submitted even in this
humiliation. I am not trying to justify myself, but
I just couldn’t face the trouble. I wrote the
statement. Roper took it, and thanking me civilly, said
he would keep it hidden as long as the money was
paid. But if there was a failure to pay he would
send it anonymously to the Institute authorities.</p>

<p>“After that everything seemed to become normal
again. Every Saturday I secretly handed Roper a
ten-shilling note and our relations otherwise went
on as before. And then came that awful afternoon
when my wife lost her life.</p>

<p>“I can never forget the horror of that time and
I surely need not dwell on it? If you have made
inquiries at Kintilloch you will know what took place.
Every word I said then was the literal truth. I
shall pass on to what happened afterwards, but if
there is any question you want to ask I will try to
answer it.”</p>

<p>“There is nothing so far.”</p>

<p>“One evening about a week after the funeral
Roper called at my house and asked for an
interview. I brought him into my study and then he
referred to the ten shillings a week and said that
he was sure I would see that his knowledge had now
become vastly more valuable, and what was I going
to do about it? I said that on the contrary it was
now almost worthless. My wife was dead and I
didn’t care what became of myself. There was
only the nurse to think of, and even about her I
didn’t now mind so much, as she had gone to
America. At the same time for peace’ sake I would
continue the payments. He need not, however, think
he was going to get any more out of me.</p>

<p>“His answer dumbfounded me. It left me
terribly shaken and upset. He said he expected I hadn’t
known it, but the police suspected me of murdering
my wife, and were making all sorts of inquiries about
me. He pointed out that it was generally believed
my wife and I hated each other: that we were seldom
seen together and that she had been overheard
speaking disparagingly of me. Then he said I was
alone in the house when she met her death; no one
had seen the accident and there was only my word
for what had taken place. He said it was known
there was a cricket bat in the hall, and that it would
be obvious to any one that a blow on the temple
from the flat side of the bat would look just like a
bruise caused by striking the floor. All this, he
said, the police had discovered, but what prevented
them taking action was the fact that they didn’t
think they could show a strong enough motive to
take the case into court. That, he said—and I shall
never forget the devilish look in his eyes—that was
where he came in. He had but to go forward and
relate the incident in the shrubbery to complete their
case. He explained that he could do it in a
perfectly natural way. He would say that while the
affair was only a mere intrigue he did not consider
it his business to interfere, but when it came to
murder it was a different thing. He did not wish to
be virtually an accessory after the fact.</p>

<p>“His remarks came as a tremendous shock to me.
The possibility of such a terrible suspicion had not
occurred to me, but now I saw that there was indeed
a good deal of circumstantial evidence against me.
I need not labour the matter. The result of our
long conversation is all you wish to hear. In the
end I was guilty of the same weakness and folly
that I had shown before; I asked him his price and
agreed to pay it. Two pounds a week, he demanded,
until further notice, and I gave way. But when he
went on to say that as before he required a
guarantee and must have a written confession of the crime,
I felt he had passed the limit. I refused to avow
a crime of which I was not guilty, and dared him to
do his worst.</p>

<p>“But once again he proved himself one too many
for me. With his cynical evil smile he took two
photographs out of his pocket and handed me one.
It was an extraordinarily clear copy of my
confession of the intrigue with the nurse. Then he handed
me the other photograph and at first I just couldn’t
believe my eyes. It was a copy of this,” and Dr.
Philpot picked up the note that French had found
in Roper’s safe deposit.</p>

<p>“I asked him, of course, for an explanation and
he admitted brazenly that he had forged the letter.
He had spent the week since the accident making
copy after copy until he had got it perfect. When
I stormed at him and threatened him with arrest he
just laughed and said the boot was on the other
foot. He said I needn’t have the slightest
uneasiness, that so long as the money was paid the letter
would never see the light of day. Otherwise the
document would be enclosed anonymously to the
police. You may guess how it ended up. I promised
to pay: and I paid.”</p>

<p>Dr. Philpot’s face looked more gray and weary
than ever and his eyes took on a deeper sombreness
as he said these words. He waited as if for French
to speak, but French did not move and he
resumed:—</p>

<p>“After all that had happened, life at Kintilloch
became inexpressibly painful for me and I began to
look out for another job. Then I heard that the
principal doctor of this little town was old and in
failing health, and there was a possible opening for
a new-comer. I resigned the Ransome job and set
up my plate here. But every week I sent two
treasury notes to Roper.</p>

<p>“Some fifteen or sixteen months ago, when I had
been here between three and four years, I had a
letter from Roper saying that he had seen an
advertisement for a man and wife to act as servants
to a Mr. Averill of Starvel in my neighbourhood.
As he had shortly before left the Ransome he
wished to apply. As a matter of fact, I found out
later that he had been dismissed for drugging a
patient. I forgot to say also that he had married
my former servant. If, he went on, I would use
my influence with Mr. Averill to get him the job he
would cease his demand for the two pounds a week
and send me the note he had forged.</p>

<p>“Mr. Averill was by this time my patient, and I
mentioned Roper to him. I could do so with a clear
conscience for with all his faults Roper was an
excellent attendant. His wife, Flora, also was a good
servant and I believed they would suit Mr. Averill
well. At the same time I told Mr. Averill just why
he had left the Ransome. But Mr. Averill thought
that for that very reason he could get them cheap
and after some negotiations they were engaged.</p>

<p>“The very same week Roper called on me and said
I had kept my word in the past and he would keep
his now. He said he was tired of crooked going
and wished to live straight. He would blackmail
me no longer. He handed me the forged note and
watched me put it in the fire. I ceased paying him
the money. From then to the day of his death he
was civil when we met, and no unpleasant subjects
were touched on. I began to believe his reformation
was genuine, but now since you show me this I see
he was unchanged. It is evident he must have made
a copy of his forgery and kept one while he let me
destroy the other. I wish you would tell me how
you got it. What his motive can have been you
may be able to guess, but I cannot.</p>

<p>“That, Inspector, is the whole truth of this
unhappy affair. I had hoped never to have to speak
of it again, and now that I have told you of it I
trust that the whole miserable business may be
decently buried and forgotten.”</p>

<p>French nodded gravely. He was puzzled by this
long story of the doctor’s. The tale was certainly
possible. As he reviewed each point he had to admit
that not only was it possible, but it was even
reasonably probable. Given a man of weak character
as this doctor appeared to be, and a clever and
unscrupulous ruffian, as Roper had been painted, the
whole affair could have happened quite naturally
and logically. Moreover it adequately covered all
the facts.</p>

<p>On the other hand, if Philpot had killed his wife
he would tell just some such tale as this. There was
no one to refute it. Roper and his wife were dead
and the nurse had left the country. Of course, it
might be possible to trace the nurse, but it certainly
couldn’t be done easily or rapidly.</p>

<p>As he turned the matter over in his mind it seemed
to French that the crucial point was the authenticity
of the confession. If Philpot had written it, he had
done so because he was guilty and because he,
therefore, could not help himself. However terrible the
putting of such a statement in black and white would
be to him, it would be the lesser of two evils, the
alternative being immediate betrayal. But if the
confession were a forgery all this would be reversed.
It could only have come into being in some such way
as the doctor had described. In fact, in his case
it would amount to a powerful confirmation of his
story.</p>

<p>Now, upon this point there was no doubt. The
confession definitely <em>was</em> a forgery. The Yard
experts were unanimous, and their opinion under such
circumstances might be taken for gospel. French
might therefore start with a strong bias in favour of
Philpot.</p>

<p>This French realised, and then he found himself
again weighed down by doubt. Was it credible that
a man would really pay blackmail for fear of
having an obviously forged confession produced? At
first French did not think so—he would not have
done it himself—but as he considered the special
circumstances he saw that this question did not
accurately describe the situation as it would appear to
the doctor. In the first place, Philpot did not know
how bad a forgery the document was. It seemed
to him his own writing, and he had no guarantee
that it would not be accepted as such. But he knew
that if it were produced he would almost certainly
have the misery of arrest and imprisonment and
possibly of trial also. Moreover, the episode of the
nurse would come out, and the result of the whole
business would have been ruin to his career. If
Philpot had been a strong man he would no doubt have
faced the situation, but as it was, French felt sure
that he would take the coward’s way. No, there was
nothing in this idea to make him doubt the man’s
story.</p>

<p>On the contrary, Philpot’s admission that he had
submitted to blackmail was actually in his favour.
If he had intended to lie surely he would have
invented a tale less damaging to himself. He had not
hesitated to tell French about the nurse and so
present him with the very motive for his wife’s
murder which was lacking in the case against himself.</p>

<p>On the whole it seemed to French that the
probabilities were on Philpot’s side and he himself inclined
to the view that he was innocent. Whatever the
truth, he saw that he had no case to bring into court.
No jury would convict on such evidence.</p>

<p>And if here was no evidence to convict the man
of the murder of his wife, there was still less to
associate him with the Starvel affair. In fact there
was here no case against him at all. Even leaving
Philpot’s illness out of the question, there was
nothing to indicate any connection with the crime. It
would be just as reasonable to suspect Emerson or
Oxley or even Kent.</p>

<p>French had an uncomfortable feeling that he had
been following will-o’-the-wisps both in this affair
and in Whymper’s. The circumstances in each had
been suspicious and he did not see how he could have
avoided following them up, but now that he had
done so it looked as if he had been wasting his time.
Ruefully he saw also that he had rather got away
from his facts. He had forgotten that the motive
of the Starvel crime had not to be sought in
anything indirect or ingenious or fanciful. The motive
was obvious enough and commonplace enough in all
conscience; it was theft. And such a motive French
could not see actuating either Philpot or Whymper.</p>

<p>No, he must get back to the facts. Who had
stolen the money? That was what he had to find
out. And he would not get it the way he was going.
He must start again and work with more skill and
vision. First, he must reassure this doctor, and then
he must get away to some place where he could think
without interruption.</p>

<p>“I am sorry, Dr. Philpot, to have had to give
you the pain of reopening matters which I can well
understand you would have preferred to leave
closed. It was necessary, however, that my doubts
on these matters should either be confirmed or set
at rest. I may say that I accept your story and am
satisfied with the explanation you have given me. I
hope it may be possible to let the affair drop and at
the present time I see no reason to prevent it.” He
arose. “I wish you good-night, doctor, and thank
you for your confidence.”</p>

</div>

<div class="chapter" id="ch09">

<h2>CHAPTER NINE: The Value of Analysis</h2>

<p>The next morning was fine and bright, with an
invigorating autumn nip in the air. The kind of
day for a good walk, thought French, as after
breakfast he stood in the hotel coffee room, looking
out on the placid life of the little town, exemplified
at the moment in the dawdling passage of three tiny
children with school satchels over their shoulders.
He liked the place. He had taken a fancy to it
on that first evening of his arrival, and what he
had seen of it since had only confirmed his first
impression. The surroundings also seemed attractive,
and he hoped to explore them more fully before he
left.</p>

<p>As he stood gazing into the main street it
occurred to him that for his explorations no time more
propitious than the present was likely to offer. For
the moment he was at a dead lock in his case. After
he had finished writing out the doctor’s statement
on the previous evening he had thought over the
affair and he had not seen his way clear. What he
required was a detailed study of the whole position
in the hope of lighting on some further clue or line
of research. And what better opportunity for such
contemplation could there be than during a long
tramp through lonely country? Surely for once
duty and inclination coincided?</p>

<p>Whether this latter was strictly true or not, ten
minutes later saw him starting out with a stick in
his hand and a packet of sandwiches in his pocket.
He turned in the Starvel direction, and climbing up
the side of the valley, came out on the wide expanse
of the moor. Ahead of him it lay, stretching away
in irregular undulating waves into the gray-blue
distance, with here and there a rounded hill rising
above the general level. For miles he could see the
ribbon of the road showing white against the browns
and greens of the grass where it wound up over
shoulders and ridges and mounted the far sides of
hollows. Extraordinarily deserted was the country
side, a solitude quite astonishing in so densely
populated a land as this of England.</p>

<p>For a time French tramped on, his mind
occupied with his surroundings, but gradually it turned
back to his case and he began reckoning up his
progress, and considering how he could best attack
what still remained to be done. And the more he
thought of it, the less rosy the outlook seemed.
Ruefully he had to admit that in point of fact he
was practically no further on than when he started.
He had done a good deal of work, no doubt, but
unfortunately it had brought him only a negative
result. His researches into the movements of
Whymper and Philpot had been unavoidable, but these had
proved side lines and he did not believe that either
would help him with the main issue.</p>

<p>He let his mind rest once again on Philpot’s
statement. If it were true, Roper showed up very badly.
From every point of view he seemed a thorough-paced
blackguard. Though this had come out more
particularly from the doctor’s story it was fairly
well-confirmed by what French had been told at
Kintilloch. Neither Sergeant MacGregor nor Dr.
Ferguson had a good word to say about the man. No
one appeared to like him, and in the end he had been
dismissed from the Institute for a fault of a
particularly serious nature.</p>

<p>But he was a clever rascal also. French was
amazed when he considered how he had succeeded in
worming himself into old Averill’s confidence.
Even making allowances for the old man’s weak-minded
senility, it was almost incredible that this
shifty scoundrel should have been trusted with a
secret which Whymper would risk a murder charge
rather than reveal.</p>

<p>French tramped on, pondering over the matter in
his careful, painstaking way. Yes, that was the
point. Misers were proverbially suspicious, and
Averill’s knowledge of Roper’s break at the
Ransome would not tend to increase his trust in him.
His confidence was certainly rather wonderful.</p>

<p>And then French suddenly stood stock still as an
idea flashed into his mind. Was his confidence not
too wonderful to be true? Had Roper really
wormed his way thus far into old Averill’s
confidence? He had not hesitated to blackmail Philpot;
had he played some similar trick on Whymper?</p>

<p>As French considered the suggestion, a point
which had before seemed immaterial now took on
a sinister significance. Though Averill was
represented as the moving spirit of the affair, his
connection with it had never been directly proved.
Roper, and Roper alone, had appeared. It was true
that a note purporting to come from Averill had
been produced, but in the light of Philpot’s revelation
of Roper’s skill as a forger, who had written
it? Was there any reason why Roper should not
have engineered the whole thing?</p>

<p>French reviewed the circumstances in detail. The
first move was Roper’s. He had met Whymper
outside the church gate and told him that Mr.
Averill wished to see him, asking him to go out there
that evening. Secretly, mind you; no one was to
know of the visit. Whymper had accordingly gone
out. But he had not seen Averill. He had seen
Roper, and Roper only. It was true that he was
presented with a note purporting to be from Averill,
but had Averill written it? French remembered
that the handwriting was extremely like Averill’s,
but in the absence of any reason for suspecting its
authenticity he had not given it the careful scrutiny
which he might have done. That was an error he
must repair at once, and if the shadow of a doubt
was aroused in his mind he must send the papers
to the Yard for expert opinion.</p>

<p>Altogether it undoubtedly looked as if the whole
of the Whymper episode might have been Roper’s
work. But if so, what about the £500? Surely in
this case Roper must have stolen it? And if he had
stolen it—French grew almost excited as step after
step revealed itself—if Roper had stolen it, did
it not follow that he had murdered Averill, rifled
the safe, taken out the notes and replaced them with
burnt newspapers?</p>

<p>And then French saw a step farther. If he were
right so far, Roper’s motive in the Whymper
incident became clear as day. If Roper had stolen
thousands of pounds’ worth of notes he must find out
whether it was safe to pass them. Were the
numbers of the notes known? This was a matter of
vital importance, and it was one on which he could
not possibly ask for information. If suspicion
became aroused, to have made inquiries on the point
would be fatal. He must therefore arrange for
some one else to pass a number of the notes, and
preferably a number of those most recently acquired
by Averill. Moreover, this person must not, if
suspected, be able to account satisfactorily for their
possession. Given the knowledge of Whymper’s
feeling for Ruth and some acquaintance with
Averill’s family affairs, a clever and unscrupulous man
like Roper could easily have invented a story to
make Whymper his dupe.</p>

<p>All this, French recognised, was speculation.
Indeed it was little more than guesswork. But it was
at least a working theory which covered all the facts,
and he believed it was worth while following it up.</p>

<p>He turned aside off the road, and sitting down
in the thin, autumn sunshine with his back against an
outcropping rock, slowly filled and lit his pipe as he
pursued his cogitations.</p>

<p>If Roper had stolen the notes and put burnt
newspapers in the safe, he must have intended to burn the
house. And here again the motive was clear. In
no other way could he so conveniently get rid of
Averill’s body and the traces of his crime. In fact,
the plan had actually succeeded. It was not the
doings at Starvel which aroused suspicion, but
Whymper’s passing of the note some three weeks later.
The coroner’s court had brought in a verdict of
accidental death. If Tarkington had not kept the
numbers of the notes sent out to Averill and advised
his headquarters that those notes had been
destroyed, no doubts would ever have arisen.</p>

<p>But just here was a snag. Could so able a man
as Roper have bungled so hideously as to have
allowed himself and his wife to be caught in the trap
he had arranged for Averill? Or had he intended
to murder Mrs. Roper also? There was certainly
no evidence for suspecting this. But whether or not,
what terrible Nemesis could have overtaken Roper?
Had he really been drunk and paid for his indulgence
with his life? French did not think so. He
could not devise any convincing explanation of
Roper’s death, and he began to wonder if this
objection were not so overwhelming as to upset the
theory of the man’s guilt which he had been so
laboriously building up.</p>

<p>He gazed out over the wide expanse of the moor
with unseeing eyes as he dreamily puffed at his pipe
and wrestled with the problem. And then a further
point occurred to him. Did not this theory of the
guilt of Roper throw some light on Ruth Averill’s
visit to York? French had noted it as a curious
coincidence that she should have left the house on the
day before the tragedy. But now he wondered if it
was a coincidence. Had her absence been arranged;
arranged by Roper? He reconsidered the facts
from this new angle.</p>

<p>First, it was significant that all the arrangements
had been carried through by Roper. Just as in
Whymper’s case, Mr. Averill was supposed to be
the prime mover, but his power was manifested only
through Roper. Roper it was who handed Ruth
the note from Mrs. Palmer-Gore; doubtless a
forged note. Roper had produced the ten pounds.
Roper had arranged about the journey, and Roper
had used his influence to prevent Ruth from seeing
her uncle. When she had persisted she found the
old man asleep, breathing heavily and looking queer
and unlike himself. As to the cause of that
appearance and that sleep French could now make a pretty
shrewd guess. Roper had been faced with a
difficulty. He could not keep Ruth from her uncle
without arousing suspicion. Nor could he allow her to
have a discussion with him or his plot would have
been exposed. He had, therefore, taken the only
way out. He had drugged the old man. Ruth
could pay her visit, but she would learn nothing from
it.</p>

<p>French was thrilled by his theory. It was working
out so well. He was congratulating himself that
at last he was on the right track, when another
snag occurred to him and brought him up, as it were,
all standing.</p>

<p>The Palmer-Gore invitation could not have been
forged! Had Mrs. Palmer-Gore not written it, the
fact would have come out on Ruth’s arrival at York.</p>

<p>Here was a rather staggering objection. But the
more French thought over the case as a whole, the
more disposed he became to believe in Roper’s guilt.
The man was a clever scoundrel. Perhaps he had
been able to devise some way to meet this difficulty
also.</p>

<p>On the whole French was so much impressed by
his theory that he determined to go into it without
loss of time in the hope that further research would
lead to a definite conclusion.</p>

<p>He ate his sandwiches, then leaving his seat in the
lee of the rock, walked back to Thirsby. Among his
papers was the letter which Roper had given to
Whymper, and this he once again compared with
the samples of old Mr. Averill’s handwriting he had
obtained from Tarkington.</p>

<p>Possibly because of the doubt now existing in his
mind, this time he felt less certain of its authenticity.
After some study he thought that some further
samples of the genuine handwriting might be helpful,
and walking down to Oxley’s office, he asked if the
solicitor could oblige him with them. Oxley handed
him four letters, and when French had critically
examined these he found his suspicions strengthened.
While by no means positive, he was now inclined to
believe Whymper’s was a forgery. He therefore
sent the lot to the Yard, asking for an expert
opinion to be wired him.</p>

<p>In the meantime he decided he would concentrate
on a point which he felt would be even more
conclusive than forged letters: the matter of Mrs.
Palmer-Gore’s invitation to Ruth. If Roper had got rid of
Ruth so that the coast might be clear for the
robbery, he had provided the invitation. He had either
written it himself or he had arranged the
circumstances which caused Mrs. Palmer-Gore to do so.
If he had done either of these things he was pretty
certain to be guilty.</p>

<p>The only way to learn the truth was to interview
Mrs. Palmer-Gore. French therefore took the
evening train to York, and nine o’clock found him at
Oakdean, Ashton Drive, asking if the lady of the
house could see him.</p>

<p>Mrs. Palmer-Gore was a big, rather untidy,
kindly-looking woman of about fifty. French, rapidly
sizing her up, introduced himself in his real
character, apologised for his late call and begged her
kind offices. If she wouldn’t mind his not giving
her the reason of his inquiry for the moment, he
should like to ask a question. Would she tell him
just why she had asked Miss Ruth Averill to York
some eight weeks previously?</p>

<p>Mrs. Palmer-Gore was naturally surprised at the
inquiry, but when she understood that the matter
was serious she answered readily.</p>

<p>“Why, I could scarcely have done anything else.
Mr. Averill’s note was phrased in a way which
would have made it difficult to refuse.”</p>

<p>“Mr. Averill’s note? I didn’t know he had
written.”</p>

<p>“Yes, he wrote to say that he hoped he was not
presuming on an old friendship in asking me
whether I would invite Ruth to spend a day or two.
He explained that she had recently been rather run
down and depressed, and that the one thing she
wanted—a day or two of cheerful society—was just
the thing he couldn’t give her. If I would condone
a liberty and take pity on her he did not think I
would regret my action. He went on to say Ruth
was greatly interested in roses, and as he was sure
I was going to the flower show, he wondered if I
would add to my kindness by allowing her to
accompany me. He said that Ruth was longing to see
it, but that he had no way of arranging for her to
go.”</p>

<p>“I’m quite interested to hear that,” French
returned. “It rather falls in with a theory I have
formed. Had you often had Miss Ruth to stay with
you?”</p>

<p>“Never before. In fact I had only seen her three
or four times. Some twelve years ago I spent a
day at Starvel and she was there. Besides that I
met her with Mr. Averill a couple of times in
Leeds.”</p>

<p>“But you were pretty intimate with Mr. Averill
surely? I don’t want to be personal, but I want to
know whether your intimacy was such that you
might reasonably expect him to ask you to put his
niece up?”</p>

<p>Mrs. Palmer-Gore seemed more and more
surprised at the line the conversation was taking.</p>

<p>“It’s a curious thing that you should have asked
that,” she declared. “As a matter of fact, I was
amazed when I read Mr. Averill’s letter. He and
I were friendly enough at one time, though I don’t
know that you could ever have called us intimate.
But we had drifted apart. I suppose we hadn’t met
for five or six years and we never corresponded
except perhaps for an exchange of greetings at
Christmas. His letter was totally unexpected.”</p>

<p>“You thought his asking for the invitation
peculiar?”</p>

<p>“I certainly did. I thought it decidedly cool. So
much so, indeed, that I considered replying that I
was sorry that my house was full. Then when I
thought what a terrible life that poor girl must have
led I relented and sent the invitation.”</p>

<p>“It was a kind thing to do.”</p>

<p>“Oh, I don’t know. At all events I am glad I
did it. Ruth is a sweet girl and it was a pleasure to
have her here and to let my daughters meet her. I
would have given her as good a time as I could if
she had not been called away.”</p>

<p>“You haven’t kept Mr. Averill’s letter?”</p>

<p>“I’m afraid not. I always destroy answered
letters.”</p>

<p>“You recognised Mr. Averill’s handwriting, of
course?”</p>

<p>“Oh yes. I knew it quite well.”</p>

<p>“Now, Mrs. Palmer-Gore, I am going to ask
you a strange question. Did you ever suspect that
that letter might be a forgery?”</p>

<p>The lady looked at him with increasing interest.</p>

<p>“Never,” she answered promptly. “And even
now when you suggest it I don’t see how it could
have been. But, of course, it would explain a great
deal. I confess I can hardly imagine Mr. Averill
writing the note. He was a proud man and the
request was not in accordance with my estimate of his
character.”</p>

<p>“That is just what I wanted to get at,” French
answered as he rose to take his leave.</p>

<p>What he had learned was extraordinarily
satisfactory. It looked very much as though his theory
about Roper was correct. The great snag in that
theory had been Mrs. Palmer-Gore’s invitation,
and now it was evident that Roper could have
arranged for it to be given. Some remark of Mr.
Averill’s had probably given the man Mrs. Palmer-Gore’s
name, and by skilful questions he could have
learned enough about her to enable him to construct
his plot.</p>

<p>As French sat in the smoking room of his hotel,
not far from the great west front of the minster, he
suddenly saw a way by which he could establish the
point. The letter Mrs. Palmer-Gore had received
had stated that Ruth was longing to see the flower
show. Was she? If she was, the letter might be
genuine enough. If not, Averill could scarcely have
written it, and if Averill had not written it no one
but Roper could have done so.</p>

<p>It was with impatience at the slowness of the
journey that French returned next morning to
Thirsby to apply the final test. He was lucky enough
to catch Ruth as she was going out and she took him
into the drawing-room.</p>

<p>“I was talking to a friend of yours a little while
ago, Miss Averill,” French said when they had
exchanged a few remarks: “Mrs. Palmer-Gore, of
York.”</p>

<p>“Oh yes?” Ruth answered, her face brightening
up. “How is she? She was so kind to me,
especially when the terrible news came. I can never
forget her goodness.”</p>

<p>“I am sure of it. In the short time I was with
her I thought she seemed most attractive. You
went to York to see the flower show?”</p>

<p>Ruth smiled.</p>

<p>“That was the ostensible reason for her asking
me. But, of course, show or no show, I should have
been delighted to go.”</p>

<p>“I dare say; most people like to visit York. You
hadn’t then been looking forward to the show?”</p>

<p>“I never even heard of it until Mrs. Palmer-Gore
mentioned it in her letter. But naturally I was all
the more pleased.”</p>

<p>“Naturally. You’re a skilful gardener, aren’t
you, Miss Averill?”</p>

<p>She smiled again and shook her head.</p>

<p>“Oh, no! But I’m fond of it.”</p>

<p>French, in his turn, smiled his pleasant, kindly
smile.</p>

<p>“Oh, come now, I’m sure you are not doing
yourself justice. Mr. Averill thought a lot of your
gardening, didn’t he?”</p>

<p>“My uncle? Oh, no. I don’t think he knew
anything about it. You remember he was an invalid.
He hadn’t been in the garden for years.”</p>

<p>“But do you mean that you never discussed
gardening with him? I should have thought, for
example, you would have talked to him of this York
flower show.”</p>

<p>“But I thought I explained I didn’t know about
that until Mrs. Palmer-Gore’s letter came, and after
it came my uncle was too ill to speak about
anything.”</p>

<p>Here was the proof French had hoped for!</p>

<p>With some difficulty keeping the satisfaction out
of his voice, he continued his inquiries.</p>

<p>“Of course I remember you told me that. But
I must get on to business. I’m sorry to have to
trouble you again, Miss Averill, but there are one
or two other questions I have thought of since our
last meeting. Do you mind if I ask them now?”</p>

<p>“Of course not.”</p>

<p>French leaned forward and looked grave.</p>

<p>“I want to know what kind of terms Roper was
on with his wife. You have seen them together a
good deal. Can you tell me?”</p>

<p>Ruth’s face clouded.</p>

<p>“I hate to say anything when the two poor people
are dead, but if I must tell the truth, I’m afraid
they were not on good terms at all.”</p>

<p>“I can understand what you feel, but I assure you
my questions are necessary. Now please tell me
what exactly was the trouble between those two?”</p>

<p>“Well,” Ruth said slowly, and an expression
almost of pain showed on her face, “they had, I
think—what is the phrase?—incompatibility of
temperament. Mrs. Roper had a very sharp tongue and
she was always nagging at Roper. He used to
answer her in a soft tone with the nastiest and most
cutting remarks you ever heard. Oh, it was
horrible! Roper really was not a nice man, though he
was always kind enough to me.”</p>

<p>This was really all that French wanted, but he still
persisted.</p>

<p>“Can you by any chance tell me—I’m sorry for
asking this question—but can you tell me whether
Roper was attached to any other woman? Or if
you don’t know that, have you ever heard his wife
mention another woman’s name in anger? Just try
to think.”</p>

<p>“No, I never heard that.”</p>

<p>“Have you ever heard them quarrelling?”</p>

<p>“Once I did,” Ruth answered reluctantly. “It
was dreadful! Roper said, ‘By ——,’ he used a
terrible curse—‘I’ll do you in some day if I swing
for it!’ And then Mrs. Roper answered so
mockingly and bitterly that I had to put my hands over
my ears.”</p>

<p>“But she didn’t make any definite accusation?”</p>

<p>“No, but wasn’t it dreadful? The poor people
to have felt like that to one another! It must have
been a terrible existence for them.”</p>

<p>French agreed gravely as he thanked Ruth for
her information, but inwardly he was chuckling with
delight. He believed his theory was proved, and
once it was established, his case was over. If the
murderer lost his life in the fire Scotland Yard would
no longer be interested in the affair and he, French,
could go back to town with one more success added
to the long list which already stood to his credit.</p>

<p>He returned to the Thirsdale Arms, and getting a
fire lighted in his room, settled down to put on paper
the data he had amassed.</p>

</div>

<div class="chapter" id="ch10">

<h2>CHAPTER TEN: Whymper Speaks at Last</h2>

<p>By the time French had completed his notes the
theory he had formed had become cut and dry and
detailed. He was immensely delighted with it and
with himself for having evolved it. Except for the
failure to explain Roper’s death it seemed to him
flawless, and for that one weak point he felt sure
that a simple explanation existed. In the hope of
lighting on some such he decided before putting
away his papers to go once more in detail over the
whole case as he now saw it.</p>

<p>First there was the character of Roper. Roper
was a clever and unscrupulous man with a cynical
and discontented outlook on life. He was, in fact,
the sort of man who might have planned and carried
out the Starvel crime.</p>

<p>His anxiety to get the job at Averill’s was an
interesting feature of the case. It must have been a
poor job for a man who had been male nurse in the
Ransome Institute. It was not only a hard and
thankless job in itself, but it meant being buried in
one of the bleakest and most barren solitudes of
England. Moreover, such a job would lead to
nothing, and as Averill was paying, it was unlikely
that the salary was other than miserable. Of course
after dismissal from the Institute Roper might have
been glad of anything, but French did not feel
satisfied that this really explained the matter. His
thoughts took another line.</p>

<p>The belief in Averill’s wealth was universal and
Roper could scarcely have failed to hear of it when
inquiring about the place. The feebleness of the
old man and the isolation of the house were, of
course, patent. Was it too much to conclude that
the idea of robbery had been in Roper’s mind from
the first? If so, a reason why he had ceased to
blackmail Philpot might be suggested. The doctor
was the one person in the neighbourhood who knew
his real character. If anything untoward happened
at Starvel, the doctor would immediately become
suspicious. It was, therefore, politic to suggest a
reformation of character to Philpot, and the best
way in which this could be done was undoubtedly
the way Roper had chosen. But he was not going to
spoil the affair by haste. This was the one great
effort of his life and he was out to make a job of it.
No time nor trouble nor inconvenience was too great
to devote to it. So he waited for over a year. How
many a wife murderer, thought French, has aroused
suspicion by marrying the other woman within the
twelve months. Roper was not going to make the
mistake of acting too soon.</p>

<p>During this time of waiting the man had
doubtless been perfecting his scheme. And then another
factor had entered into it. He had come to hate
his wife. Why not at one fell stroke achieve both
wealth and freedom? The same machinery would
accomplish both.</p>

<p>In the nature of the case French saw that all this
must necessarily be speculative, but when he came to
consider the details of the crime he felt himself on
firmer ground.</p>

<p>The first move was to get Ruth Averill out of the
way, and here the <i lang="la">modus operandi</i> was clear. Roper
had evidently either heard enough about Mrs.
Palmer-Gore from Mr. Averill to give him his idea, or
he had discovered her existence from old letters.
He had forged the note to her from Averill, and
intercepting its reply, had used its enclosure to
induce Ruth to go to York. As he couldn’t prevent
the girl from visiting her uncle, he had drugged the
old man so that the fraud would remain hidden.</p>

<p>His next care was to make sure that Averill’s
bank notes could be passed without arousing
suspicion; in other words, that their numbers were
unknown. To this end the fraud on Whymper was
devised. Whymper was to be used to test the
matter, and in the event of the theft being discovered,
Whymper was to pay the penalty. So Whymper
was brought out to the house on the night of the
crime and there given the fateful money, being told
some yarn which would make him spend it in a
mysterious way for which he would be unable to
account. That that yarn was connected with
something discreditable about Ruth’s parents French
shrewdly suspected, and he determined to see
Whymper again and try to extract the truth from
him.</p>

<p>Whymper duped and sent away from Starvel,
French thought he could picture the next sinister
happenings in the lonely old house. Averill first!
The frail old man would prove an easy victim. Any
method of assassination would do which did not
involve an injury to the skeleton. A further dose
of the drug, smothering with a pillow, a whiff of
chloroform: the thing would have been child’s
play to a determined man, particularly one with the
training of a male nurse in a mental hospital.</p>

<p>Then Mrs. Roper! How the unfortunate woman
met her end would probably remain for ever a
mystery. But that she died by her husband’s hand
French was growing more and more certain.</p>

<p>Witnesses to the theft removed, the safe must
have claimed Roper’s attention next. French in
imagination could see him getting the keys from
under their dead owner’s pillow, opening the safe,
and packing the notes in a suitcase. How it must
have gone to Roper’s heart to leave the gold! But
obviously he had no other course. Gold wouldn’t
burn. It must therefore be found in the safe. Then
came the substitution and burning of the newspapers.
Here Roper made his first slip. Doubtless he was
counting that the safe would fall to the ground level
when the floor it stood on burned away and the
churning of the sovereigns would reduce the paper
ashes to dust. But there he had been wrong.
Enough was left to reveal the fraud.</p>

<p>There was plenty of petrol and paraffin in the
house and Roper’s next step must have been to spill
these about, so as to leave no doubt of the completeness
of the holocaust. In that also he was only too
successful.</p>

<p>So far, French felt he was on pretty firm ground.
He was becoming convinced that all this had
happened, substantially as he had imagined it. But now
came the terrible snag. Or rather two snags, for
the one did not entirely include the other. The first
was: What had happened to Roper? The second:
Where was the money?</p>

<p>The more French puzzled over the first of these
problems the more he came to doubt his first idea
that some quite simple explanation would account
for it. That nearly every criminal makes some
stupid and obvious blunder during the commission
of his crime is a commonplace. Still French could
not see so astute a man as Roper making a blunder
so colossal as to cost him his life. What
super-ghastliness had happened upon that night of
horrors? Had Roper started the fire before killing his
wife and been overcome by fumes while in the act
of murder? Had he taken too much drink to steady
his nerves and fallen asleep, to meet the fate he
had prepared for others? French could think of
no theory which seemed satisfactory.</p>

<p>Nor could he imagine where the money might be.
Was it burned after all? Had the receptacle in
which it had been packed been left in the house and
had its contents been destroyed? Or had Roper
hidden it outside? Here again the matter was
purely speculative, but French inclined to the former
theory. All the same he determined that before
he left the district he would make a thorough search
in the neighbourhood of the house.</p>

<p>There was still the matter of the Whymper
episode to be fully cleared up, and French thought that
with the help of his new theory he might now be able
to get the truth out of the young man.
Accordingly he left the hotel and walked up the picturesque
old street to the church. Whymper was busily
engaged with a steel tape in giving positions for a
series of new steps which were to lead up to the altar
and French, interested in the operation, stood
watching until it was complete. Then the young
fellow conducted him for the second time to the
vestry room, and seating himself, pointed to a chair.</p>

<p>“As no doubt you can guess, I’ve come on the
same business as before,” French explained in his
pleasant, courteous tones. “The fact is, I’ve learned
a good deal more about this Starvel business since
I last saw you, and I want to hear what you think
of a theory I have evolved. But first, will you tell
me everything that you can of your relations with
Roper?”</p>

<p>“I really hadn’t any relations with Roper except
what I have already mentioned,” Whymper returned.
“Of course I had seen him on different occasions,
but the first time I spoke to him was the first
time I called on Miss Averill. He opened the door
and showed me into the drawing-room. The next
time I went we spoke about the weather and so on,
but I had no actual relations with him until the night
of the tragedy, when he gave me Mr. Averill’s
message at the church gate.”</p>

<p>“It never occurred to you to doubt that the
message did come from Mr. Averill, I suppose?”</p>

<p>“Of course not,” Whymper answered promptly.
“You forget the note Mr. Averill sent me when I
got to Starvel.”</p>

<p>“I don’t forget the note. But suppose I were
to suggest that Roper had forged the note and that
Mr. Averill knew nothing whatever about it? I
should tell you that it has been established that
Roper was a very skilful forger.”</p>

<p>“Such an idea never occurred to me. Even if
Roper was a skilful forger I don’t see why you
should think he forged this note. What possible
motive could he have had?”</p>

<p>“Well, I think we possibly might find a motive.
But let that pass for the moment. Go over the
circumstances again in your mind and let me know if
you see any reason why Roper should not have
arranged the whole business himself.”</p>

<p>Whymper did not at once reply. French,
anxious not to hurry him, remained silent also, idly
admiring the pilasters and mouldings of the octagonal
chamber and the groining of the old stone roof.</p>

<p>“I don’t see how Roper could have done it,”
Whymper said presently. “There’s the money to
be considered. The £500 couldn’t have been
forged.”</p>

<p>“No. But it could have been stolen, and I have
no doubt it was.”</p>

<p>“Surely not! You don’t really believe Roper
was a thief?”</p>

<p>“At least he might have been. No, Mr.
Whymper, you haven’t convinced me so far. Does
anything further occur to you?”</p>

<p>“Yes,” said Whymper: “the story he told me.
No one could have known it but Mr. Averill.”</p>

<p>French leaned forward and his face took on an
expression of keener interest.</p>

<p>“Ah, now we’re coming to it,” he exclaimed. “I
suggest that that whole story was a pure invention
of Roper’s and that it had no foundation in fact.
Now tell me this.” He raised his hand as Whymper
would have spoken. “If the story were true would
you not have expected to hear something of M.
Prosper Giraud and Mme. Madeleine Blancquart
at Talloires?”</p>

<p>Whymper seemed absolutely dumbfounded at
the extent of the other’s knowledge.</p>

<p>“Why,” he stammered with all the appearance
of acute dismay, “how do you know about that? I
never mentioned it.”</p>

<p>“You did,” French declared. “To the police at
Talloires. I traced you there and found out about
your inquiries. It was perfectly simple. If the
story had been true would you not have had an
answer to your inquiries?”</p>

<p>A sudden eagerness appeared in the young man’s
face. He leaned forward and cried excitedly:—</p>

<p>“My Heavens, I never thought of that! I
supposed Roper had made a mistake about the address.
Oh, if it could only be so!” He paused for a
moment, then burst out again: “You may be right! You
may be right! Tell me why you thought it might
be Roper’s invention. I must know!”</p>

<p>“In the strictest confidence I’ll tell you
everything,” French answered and he began to recount,
not indeed everything, but a good many of the
reasons which had led him to believe in Roper’s guilt.
Whymper listened with painful intensity, and when
the other had finished he seemed almost unable to
contain his excitement.</p>

<p>“I must know if you are right,” he cried,
springing from his chair and beginning to pace the room.
“I must know! How can I be sure, Inspector? You
have found out so much; can’t you find out a little
more?”</p>

<p>“That’s what I came down for, Mr. Whymper,”
French said gravely. “I must know too. And
there’s only one way out of it. You’ve got to tell
me the story. I’ll not use it unless it’s absolutely
necessary. But I’ll test it and get to know definitely
whether it’s fact or fiction.”</p>

<p>Whymper paused irresolutely.</p>

<p>“Suppose,” he said at length, “suppose, telling
you the story involved letting you know of a crime
which had been committed—not recently; many,
many years ago. Suppose the criminal had escaped,
but my story told you where you could find him.
Would you give me your word of honour not to
move in the matter?”</p>

<p>French glanced at him sharply.</p>

<p>“Of course not, Mr. Whymper. You know it is
foolish of you to talk like that. Neither you nor
I could have knowledge of that kind and remain
silent. If you learn of a crime and shield the
criminal, you become an accessory after the fact. You
must know that.”</p>

<p>“In that case,” Whymper answered, “I can’t tell
you.”</p>

<p>French became once more suave, even coaxing.</p>

<p>“Now, Mr. Whymper, that is quite an impossible
line for you to take up. Just consider your own
position. I have ample evidence to justify me in
arresting you for the theft of Mr. Averill’s money.
If I do so, this story that you are trying to keep to
yourself will come out: not privately to me, but in
open court. Every one will know it then. By
keeping silent now you will defeat the very object you
are striving for. Attention will be forced on to the
very person you are trying to shield. And when
it comes out you will be charged as an accessory.
On the other hand, if you tell me the whole thing
here and in private you will ease your mind of a
burden and may clear yourself of suspicion of the
theft. And with regard to the other crime we may
find that it is a pure invention and that no such thing
ever took place. Now, Mr. Whymper, you’ve got
to take the lesser risk. You’ve got to tell me. As
I say, I’ll not use your evidence unless I must.”</p>

<p>Whymper made no reply and French, recalling
his theory that the secret concerned Ruth’s
parentage, decided on a bluff.</p>

<p>“Well,” he said, quite sharply for him. “If you
won’t speak I shall have to get the information
from Miss Averill. I shall be sorry to have to force
her confidence about her parents, but you leave me
no option.”</p>

<p>The bluff worked better than French could have
hoped. Whymper started forward with
consternation on his face.</p>

<p>“What?” he cried. “Then you know?” Then
realising what he had said, he swore. “Confound
you, Inspector, that was a caddish trick! But you
won’t get any more out of me in spite of it.”</p>

<p>French tried his bluff again.</p>

<p>“Nonsense,” he answered. “It would be far
better for Miss Averill that you should tell me than
that she should. But that’s a matter for you. If
you like to tell me, well; if not, I shall go straight
to her. Look here,” he leaned forward and tapped
the other’s arm, “do you imagine that you can keep
the affair secret? I’ve only got to trace Mr. Simon
Averill’s history and go into the matter of Miss
Ruth’s parentage and the whole thing will come out.
It’s silly of you.” He waited for a moment, then
got up. “Well, if you won’t, you won’t. You’ll
come along to the station first and then I’ll go to
Miss Averill.”</p>

<p>Whymper looked startled.</p>

<p>“Are you going to arrest me?”</p>

<p>“What else can I do?” French returned.</p>

<p>Whymper wrung his hands as if in despair, then
motioned the Inspector to sit down again.</p>

<p>“Wait a minute,” he said brokenly. “I’ll tell
you. I see I can’t help myself. It is not that I am
afraid for myself, but I see from all you say that
I have no alternative. But I trust your word not
to use the information if you can avoid it.”</p>

<p>“I give you my word.”</p>

<p>“Well, I suppose that is as much as I can expect.”
He paused to collect his thoughts, then went on: “I
have already explained to you about Roper meeting
me when I reached Starvel and his saying that Mr.
Averill was too ill to see me, and you have seen
the letter that I took to be from Mr. Averill,
stating that he did not wish to put the matter in
question in writing, that Roper was his confidential
attendant, that he understood the affair in question
and had been authorised to explain it to me. Of
course on receipt of that letter I was prepared to
believe whatever I heard, and I did believe it.”</p>

<p>“Quite natural,” French admitted suavely.</p>

<p>“Roper began by saying that his part in the affair
was very distasteful to him, that he felt he was
intruding into a family and very private matter, but
that he had no alternative but to carry it through as
Mr. Averill had given him definite instructions to do
so. He added that he was particularly sorry about
it, as the matter was bound to be very painful to me.
It was about Miss Averill.”</p>

<p>Whymper was evidently very reluctant to proceed,
but he overcame his distaste after a moment’s
hesitation and in a lower voice continued:—</p>

<p>“He went on to ask me, again with apologies,
whether Mr. Averill was correct in believing I
wished to marry Miss Averill. If I did not, he said
the information would be of no interest to me and
he need not proceed with the matter. But if I did
wish to marry her there was something I should
know.</p>

<p>“As a matter of fact, I wanted the marriage more
than anything else on earth, and when I said so to
Roper he gave me the message. He told me that,
a few days before, Mr. Averill had received a
letter which upset him very much and, Roper thought,
had brought on his illness. But before I could
appreciate the significance of the letter he would have
to explain some family matters.</p>

<p>“Mr. Simon Averill had a brother named
Theodore—I shall call them Simon and Theodore to
distinguish them. As a young man Theodore had
all the promise of a brilliant career. He had
gone into business in London and held a very good
position as French representative of his firm. He
had married a French lady of old family and great
beauty. One child was born, a daughter, Ruth.</p>

<p>“But unfortunately he was not steady, and as
time passed he grew wilder and wilder and his
relations with his wife became more and more strained.
At last when Ruth was four years old and they were
living in London, there was some fearful trouble
which finished him up.</p>

<p>“Roper did not know the details, but it was a
scandal in some illicit gambling rooms in London.
Theodore was caught cheating. They were all half
drunk and in the row that followed a man was killed.
It was never known who actually fired the shot, but
Theodore was suspected. At all events he
disappeared and was never heard of again. It was the
last straw for his wife and she collapsed altogether.
She brought Ruth, a child of four, to Simon, begged
him to look after her, and then committed suicide.</p>

<p>“Nothing more was heard of Theodore Averill
and every one concerned believed him dead.
Simon’s surprise may be imagined then, when during
the last two or three days he received a letter from
him. This was the letter which I told you had
upset him so much.</p>

<p>“I didn’t see the letter, but Roper told me it said
that Theodore was living under the name of
Prosper-Giraud at Talloires in Savoy. He had escaped
from London to Morocco and after wandering
about for a year or two had entered the French
Foreign Legion. After serving several years he
left that and went to Talloires, where he supported
himself by writing short stories for the magazines.
He did fairly well, and was comfortable enough,
but recently a disastrous thing had happened to him.
He had been in poor health for some time and had
begun to talk in his sleep. His old housekeeper,
Mme. Madeleine Blancquart, must have listened and
heard something which gave his secret away, for
one morning she came to him and said she had
discovered all, and asked what he was going to pay
to have the matter kept from the English police.
He was unable to give what she demanded and for
the sake of his family he prayed his brother Simon
to help him. If Simon wouldn’t do so, nothing could
save him. He would be brought to England and
perhaps executed, and Simon and Ruth would have
to bear the shame.”</p>

<p>The recital of these facts was evidently very
painful to Whymper, but he went on doggedly with his
statement.</p>

<p>“Simon in his delicate state of health was much
upset by the whole thing, so Roper said. If the
story was true he was willing to make some
allowance, both because he didn’t wish to have his brother
come to such an end and also for his own and Ruth’s
sake. He had, therefore, replied sending twenty
pounds, and saying that he would either go over
himself to Talloires or send a representative within
a month to discuss the situation.</p>

<p>“He found he was too feeble to go himself and
for the same reason he couldn’t well spare Roper, so
he cast round for some one who could do it for him,
and he thought of me. He thought that if I wanted
to marry Miss Averill the secret would be safe with
me and also I should be just as anxious to have the
matter settled as he was.</p>

<p>“Of course I agreed to go. You can understand
that I really hadn’t any option, though as far as I
was concerned myself I didn’t care two pins what
Theodore had done or hadn’t done. Roper said
Simon would be extremely relieved to hear my
decision. He said also that Simon did not wish me
to go for about three weeks, lest it would look too
eager and Mme. Blancquart would think she had
frightened us.</p>

<p>“Roper went on to say that Simon was giving me
£500. Out of this I was to take my expenses and
the balance was to buy off Mme. Blancquart. He
did not want me to give her a lump sum, but to
arrange a monthly payment which she would know she
would lose if she informed. I was to find some one
in Talloires who would take the money and dole it
out for a percentage. The <i lang="fr">curé</i> possibly might do
it, or I could employ a solicitor. He left the
arrangements to my judgment. In any case I was to
make the best bargain I could with the woman.</p>

<p>“That was all on the Wednesday night before the
fire started. Then came the tragedy. With Simon
dead I didn’t know what on earth to do. Of course
I saw that I must carry out my promise just the
same, and go out to Talloires and try to arrange for
Theodore’s safety, but I thought that if Simon’s
money went to Ruth, Theodore might try to make
trouble with her. However, I could do nothing
until I saw him and Mme. Blancquart, and I
arranged to go to Talloires at the end of the three
weeks as Simon had asked me.</p>

<p>“You can guess the rest. I took the money and
went to Talloires. But as you know, I could find
no trace either of Prosper Giraud or Mme.
Blancquart.</p>

<p>“I was in a difficulty then. I had no doubt that
the message was really Simon’s. It never occurred
to me that Roper could invent the story or steal the
money, and when I failed to find the people I
simply thought he had made a mistake in the address.
I was pretty bothered, I can tell you. I was
expecting every day to read of Theodore’s arrest, and I
could do nothing to prevent it.” The young man
was very earnest as he added: “I swear to you that
what I have told you is the literal truth. I don’t
know whether you will believe me, but whether or
not, I am glad I’ve told you. It is a tremendous
weight off my mind, and if you can prove that the
story was only Roper’s invention I’ll be ten thousand
times more relieved.”</p>

<p>French felt that he might very well believe the
statement. Not only had Whymper’s manner
changed and borne the almost unmistakable
impress of truth, but the story he told was just the
kind of story French was expecting to hear. No
tale that he could think of would have better suited
Roper’s purpose: to make this young fellow change
stolen bank notes the possession of which he could
not account for. The more French thought it over
in detail, the more satisfied he felt with it. It was
true that there were two minor points which he
did not fully understand, but neither would
invalidate the tale, even if unexplained. Of these the
first was: Why had Roper asked Whymper to wait
three weeks before going to France? And the
second: If the young man was as enamoured of this
girl as he pretended to be, why had he not proposed
to her so as to be in a proper position to offer her
his protection?</p>

<p>A little thought gave him the answer to the first
of these problems. Evidently no suspicion must fall
on Whymper other than through the notes. If he
were to rush away directly the tragedy occurred,
any general suspicion which might have been
aroused might be directed towards him for that very
reason. That would be no test of the safety of
passing the notes. But if three weeks elapsed
before he made a move, suspicion must depend on the
notes alone.</p>

<p>With regard to the second point French thought
he might ask for information.</p>

<p>“I don’t want to be unnecessarily personal, Mr.
Whymper, but there is just one matter I should like
further light on. You were, I understand you to
say, anxious to marry this young lady and desired
to protect her from trouble with Mme. Blancquart.
If that were so, would it not have been natural for
you to propose to her and so obtain the right to
protect her?”</p>

<p>Whymper made a gesture of exasperation.</p>

<p>“By Heaven, I only wish I had! It might have
come out all right. But, Inspector, I have been a
coward. To be strictly truthful, I was afraid. I’ll
tell you just what happened. After the tragedy I
was very much upset by this whole affair. And it
made me awkward and self-conscious with Miss
Averill to have to keep secret a thing which
concerned her so closely. I tried not to show it in my
manner, but I don’t think I quite succeeded. I think
my manner displeased her. At all events she grew
cold and distant, and—well! there it is. I didn’t
dare to speak. I was afraid I would have no chance.
I thought I would wait until I found something out
about her father. Then when this began to seem
impossible, I determined to risk all and speak, but
then you came threatening me with arrest for theft.
I couldn’t propose until that was over. And the
question is, is it over now? Are you going to arrest
me or how do I stand?”</p>

<p>“I’m not going to arrest you, Mr. Whymper.
You have given me the explanations I asked for,
and so far I see no reason to doubt your story. I
am glad you have told me. But though I believe
you, I may say at once that I believe also the whole
thing was Roper’s invention. Why did he not show
the letter he alleged Theodore Averill had
written?”</p>

<p>“I don’t know. I assumed there was something
further in it which Mr. Averill wished to keep from
Roper and me.”</p>

<p>French shook his head.</p>

<p>“Much more likely it didn’t exist and he wanted
to save the labour and risk of forging it. Now, Mr.
Whymper, there is only one thing to be done. You
or I, or both of us together must go to Miss Averill
and ask her the truth. I do not mean that we must
tell her this story. We shall simply ask her where
her father lived, and where she was born. Records
will be available there which will set the matter at
rest.”</p>

<p>Whymper saw the common sense of this proposal,
but he said that nothing would induce him to
ask such questions of Miss Averill. It was,
therefore, agreed that French should call on her and
make the inquiries.</p>

<p>Ruth was at home when French reached the
Oxleys’, and she saw him at once. French
apologised for troubling her so soon again, and then
asked some questions as to the possible amount of
petrol and paraffin which had been at Starvel on the
night of the fire. From this he switched the
conversation on to herself, and with a dexterity born
of long practice led her to talk of her relatives. So
deftly did he question her, that when in a few
minutes he had discovered all he wished to know, she
had not realised that she had been pumped.</p>

<p>In answer to his veiled suggestions she told him
that her father’s name was Theodore Averill, that
he had lived in Bayonne, where he had held a good
appointment in the wine industry, and that he had
married a French lady whom he had met at
Biarritz. This lady, her mother, had died when she
was born and her father had only survived her by
about four years. On his death she had come to
her uncle Simon, he being her only other relative.
She was born in Bayonne and baptised, she believed,
by the Anglican clergyman at Biarritz. Her father
was a member of the Church of England and her
mother a Huguenot.</p>

<p>“This,” French said when, half an hour later,
he was back in the vestry room of the old church,
“will lead us to certainty. I will send a wire to the
Biarritz police and have the records looked up. Of
course, I don’t doubt Miss Averill’s word for a
moment, but it is just conceivable that she might have
been misled as to her birth. However, we want to
be absolutely sure.”</p>

<p>He wired that evening and it may be mentioned
here that in the course of a couple of days he
received the following information:—</p>

<p>1. Mr. Theodore Averill was a wine merchant
and lived at Bayonne.</p>

<p>2. Mr. Averill and Mlle. Anne de Condillac had
been married in the English church at Biarritz on
the 24th of June, 1905.</p>

<p>3. Mrs. Averill had died on the 17th of July,
1906, while giving birth to a daughter.</p>

<p>4. This daughter, whose name was Ruth, was
baptised at the Anglican church, Biarritz, on the
19th of August, 1906.</p>

<p>5. Mr. Theodore Averill had died on the 8th
of September, 1910, his little four-year old
daughter then being sent to England.</p>

<p>So that was certainty at last. Roper was the evil
genius behind all these involved happenings. He it
was who had got Ruth away from the doomed
house; he had sent Whymper off to pass the stolen
notes so that he might learn if their numbers were
known; he had murdered Simon Averill; he had
stolen the notes from the safe; he had murdered his
wife; he had burned the house. All was now
clear—except the one point at which French, trembling
with exasperation, was again brought up. What
had happened to Roper? What blunder had he
made? How had he died? And again; where was
the money? Was it hidden or was it destroyed?</p>

<p>As French went down to the police station to tell
Sergeant Kent he might withdraw his observation
on Whymper, he determined that next morning he
would begin a meticulous and detailed search of the
ground surrounding the ruins in the hope of finding
the answer to his last question.</p>

<p>But next morning French instead found himself
contemplating with a growing excitement a new idea
which had leaped into his mind and which bade fair
to change the whole future course of his
investigation.</p>

</div>

<div class="chapter" id="ch11">

<h2>CHAPTER ELEVEN: A Startling Theory</h2>

<p>Inspector French’s change of plans was due
to a new idea which suddenly, like the conventional
bolt from the blue, flashed across the horizon of
his vision.</p>

<p>For some reason he had been unable to sleep on
that night on which he had completed his proof that
the Whymper incident had been engineered by
Roper. French, as a rule, was a sound sleeper: he
was usually too tired on getting to bed to be
anything else. But on the rare occasions when he
remained wakeful he nearly always turned the
circumstance to advantage by concentrating on the difficulty
of the moment. His brain at such times seemed
more active than normally, and more than one of
his toughest problems had been solved during the
hours of darkness. It was true that he frequently
reached conclusions which in the sober light of day
appeared fantastic and had to be abandoned, but
valuable ideas had come so often that when up
against a really difficult case he had thankfully
welcomed a sleepless night in the hope of what it might
bring forth.</p>

<p>On this occasion, when he had employed all the
conventional aids to slumber without effect, he
turned his attention to the one problem in the
Starvel Hollow tragedy which up to now had baffled
him: the cause of Roper’s fate. How had the man
come to lose his life? What terrible mistake had
he made? How had Nemesis overtaken him?
French felt he could see the whole ghastly business
taking place, excepting always this one point. And
the more he thought of it, the more difficult it
appeared. It seemed almost incredible that so clever
a man should have blundered so appallingly.</p>

<p>He had asked himself these questions for the
hundredth time when there leaped into his mind an
idea so startling that for a moment he could only lie
still and let his mind gradually absorb it. Roper’s
death seemed the incredible feature of the case, but
<em>was this a feature of the case at all?</em> <em>Had Roper
died?</em> What if his death was a fake, arranged to
free him from the attentions of the police so that
he might enjoy without embarrassment the fruits
of his crime?</p>

<p>French lay trying to recall the details of a
paragraph he had read in the paper a year or two
previously and wondering how he had failed up to the
present to draw a parallel between it and the Starvel
Hollow affair. It was the account of the burning
of a house in New York. After the fire it was
found that a lot of valuable property had
disappeared and further search revealed the remains of
two human bodies. Two servants were believed to
have been in the house at the time, and these bodies
were naturally assumed to have been theirs.
Afterwards it was proved—French could not remember
how—that the two left in the house had planned
the whole affair so as to steal the valuables. They
had visited a cemetery, robbed a grave of two
bodies, conveyed these to the house, set the place on
fire and made off with the swag. Had Roper seen
this paragraph and determined to copy the
Americans? Or had the same idea occurred to him
independently?</p>

<p>How Roper might or might not have evolved his
plan was however, a minor point. The question
was—had he evolved and carried out such a plan?
Was he now alive and in possession of the money?</p>

<p>It was evident there were two possible lines of
inquiry, either of which might give him his
information.</p>

<p>The first was the definite identification of the body
which had been found in the position of Roper’s
bed. Was there any physical peculiarity about
Roper which would enable a conclusion to be
reached as to whether this body was or was not
his? It was true that the remains had been
examined by Dr. Emerson and unhesitatingly accepted
as Roper’s, but the doctor had had no reason for
doubt in the matter and might therefore have
overlooked some small point which would have led to a
contrary conclusion.</p>

<p>The second line of inquiry was more promising.
If Roper had carried out such a fraud he must have
provided a body to substitute for his own. Had he
done so, and if he had, where had this body been
obtained?</p>

<p>Here was an act which, French felt, could not
have been done without leaving traces. Roper had
proved himself a very skilful man, but the secret
acquisition of a dead body in a country like England
was an extraordinarily difficult undertaking, and of
course the more difficult an action was to carry out,
the greater were the chances of its discovery. Proof
or disproof of his theory would be quickly
forthcoming.</p>

<p>Hour after hour French lay pondering the
matter, and when shortly before daylight he at last fell
asleep, he had laid his plans for the prosecution of
his new inquiry.</p>

<p>He began by calling on Dr. Emerson. The doctor
was writing in his consulting room when French was
shown in, and he rose to greet his visitor with
old-fashioned courtesy.</p>

<p>“Sorry for troubling you again, doctor,” French
began with his pleasant smile, “but I wanted to ask
you a question. It won’t take five minutes.”</p>

<p>“My dear sir, there is no hurry. I’m quite at
your disposal.”</p>

<p>“Very good of you, Dr. Emerson, I’m sure. It’s
really a matter more of idle curiosity than a serious
inquiry. I was thinking over that Starvel affair,
and I wondered how you were able to identify the
bodies. It was a phrase in the evidence that struck
me. I gathered that you said that the bodies of
each of the three occupants of the house were lying
on the sites of their respective beds. I should like
to ask if that was stated from definite identification
of the remains, or if it was merely a reasonable and
justifiable assumption?”</p>

<p>“If that is what you read, I am afraid I have not
been correctly reported. I certainly never said that
the body found at each bed was that of the owner of
the bed. That they were so I have no doubt: from
every point of view I think that is a reasonable and
justifiable assumption, to use your own phrase. But
actual identification was quite impossible. It is
rather an unpleasant subject, but fire, especially such
a furnace as must have raged at Starvel, destroys
practically all physical characteristics.”</p>

<p>“But you were able to tell the sex and age of the
victims?”</p>

<p>“The sex and approximate age, yes. Given a
skeleton or even certain bones, that can be stated
with certainty. But that is a very different thing
from identification.”</p>

<p>“I thought I was right,” French declared. “I
had always heard that was the result of fire, and
therefore was puzzled. Identification of burnt
remains has however been frequently established from
rings or jewelry, has it not?”</p>

<p>“Certainly, though there was nothing of the kind
in the instance in question. Indeed, such
identification would have been almost impossible in any case.
In that intense heat gold rings or settings would
have melted and the stones themselves would have
dropped out and would only be found by an
extraordinarily lucky chance.”</p>

<p>French rose.</p>

<p>“Quite so. I agree. Well, I’m glad to know I
was right. We Yard Inspectors are always on the
look-out for first-hand information.”</p>

<p>So the first of the three lines of inquiry had
petered out. The bodies were unidentifiable, and
therefore so far as that was concerned, his theory
might be true or it might not.</p>

<p>As he strolled slowly back to the hotel, French
considered his second clue: the provision by Roper
of a body to take the place of his own.</p>

<p>From the first the difficulty of such a feat had
impressed French, and as he now thought of it in detail,
this difficulty grew until it seemed almost
insurmountable. Where could bodies be obtained? Only
surely in one of three ways: from a medical
institution, from a cemetery, and by means of murder.</p>

<p>With regard to the first of these three, it was
true that bodies were used for medical purposes,
for dissection, for the instruction of students. But
they were not obtainable by outside individuals.
French thought that it would be absolutely
impossible for Roper to have secured what he wanted
from such a source. So convinced of this was he
that he felt he might dismiss the idea from his
mind.</p>

<p>Could then the remains have been obtained from
a cemetery?</p>

<p>Here again the difficulties, though not quite so
overwhelming, were sufficiently great as almost to
negative the suggestion. Of one thing French felt
convinced; that neither Roper nor any other man
in Roper’s position could have carried out such an
enterprise singlehanded. One or more confederates
would have been absolutely necessary. To mention
a single point only, no one person would have had
the physical strength to perform such a task. No
one person, furthermore, could have taken the
requisite precautions against surprise or discovery, nor
could one person have carried out the needful
transport arrangements between the cemetery and
Starvel.</p>

<p>The whole subject, as French thought out its
details, was indescribably gruesome and revolting.
But so interested was he in its purely intellectual
side—as a problem for which a solution must be
found—that he overlooked the horror of the actual
operations. For him the matter was one of pure
reason. He did not consider the human emotions
involved except in so far as these might influence
the conduct of the actors in the terrible drama.</p>

<p>Assuming then that the remains had not been
procured from a cemetery, there remained but one
alternative—murder! Some unknown person must
have been inveigled into that sinister house and there
done to death, so as to provide the needful third
body! If Roper were guilty of the Starvel crime
as French now understood it, it looked as if he must
have been guilty of a third murder, hitherto
unsuspected.</p>

<p>Here was food for thought and opportunity for
inquiry. Who had disappeared about the time of
the tragedy? Was any one missing in the
neighbourhood? Had any one let it be known that he was
leaving the district or going abroad about that date?
Instead of being at the end of his researches, French
was rather appalled by the magnitude of the
investigation which was opening out in front of him. To
obtain the necessary information might require the
prolonged activities of a large staff.</p>

<p>He was anxious not to give away the lines on
which he was working. He decided therefore not
to make his inquiries from Sergeant Kent at the
local station, but to go to Leeds and have an
interview with the Chief Constable.</p>

<p>Accordingly, unconsciously following the example
of Oxley and Tarkington several weeks earlier, he
took the 3.30 train that afternoon and two hours
later was seated in Chief Constable Valentine’s room
at police headquarters. The old gentleman received
him very courteously, and for once French met some
one who seemed likely to outdo him in suavity and
charm of manner.</p>

<p>“I thought, sir, my case was over when I had
cleared up the matter of the bank notes passed to
Messrs. Cook in London,” French declared as he
accepted a cigarette from the other’s case, “but one
or two rather strange points have made me form a
tentative theory which seems sufficiently probable
to need going into. In short——” and he explained
with business-like brevity his ideas about Roper with
the facts from which they had sprung.</p>

<p>The Chief Constable was profoundly impressed
by the recital, much more so than French would
have believed possible.</p>

<p>“It’s a likely enough theory,” he admitted.
“Your arguments seem unanswerable and I certainly
agree that the idea is sufficiently promising to
warrant investigation.”</p>

<p>“I’m glad, sir, that you think so. In my job, as
you know, there is always the danger of being
carried away by some theory that appeals because of
its ingenuity, while overlooking some more
commonplace explanation that is much more likely to be
true.”</p>

<p>“I know that, and this may of course be an
instance. I am glad, however, that you mentioned
your theory to me. It is an idea which should be
kept secret, and I shall set inquiries on foot
without giving away the Starvel connection.”</p>

<p>“Then, sir, you can’t recall any disappearances
about the time?”</p>

<p>“I can’t. And I don’t expect we shall find any.
Do you?”</p>

<p>“Well, I was in hope that we might.”</p>

<p>Major Valentine shook his head.</p>

<p>“No, Inspector; there I think you’re wrong,” he
said with decision. “If Roper really carried out
these crimes, he’s far too clever to leave an obvious
trail of that kind. We may be sure that if he
inveigled some third person to the house and
murdered him, a satisfactory explanation of the victim’s
absence was provided. You suggested it yourself in
your statement. The man will ostensibly have left
his surroundings, never to return. If he was a
native he will have gone to America or some other
distant place. If he was a visitor he will have left
to return home. Somehow matters will have been
arranged so that he will disappear without raising
suspicion. Don’t you think so?”</p>

<p>“Yes, sir, I certainly do. But it’s going to make
it a hard job to trace him.”</p>

<p>“I know it is. If he lived in a large town it will
be so hard that we probably shan’t succeed, but if
he came from the country or a village the local men
should have the information.”</p>

<p>“That is so, sir. Then I may leave the matter in
your hands?”</p>

<p>“Yes, I’ll attend to it. By the way, where are
you staying?”</p>

<p>French told him, and after some desultory
discussion, took his leave and caught the last train back
to Thirsby. He was partly pleased and partly
disappointed by his interview. He had hoped for the
co-operation of the Chief Constable, but Major
Valentine had gone much further than this. He had
really taken the immediate further prosecution of
the investigation out of French’s hands. French
was therefore temporarily out of a job. Moreover
French had the contempt of the Londoner and the
specialist for those whom he was pleased to think
of as “provincial amateurs.” And yet he could not
have acted otherwise than as he had. The
organisation of the police with all its ramifications was
needed for the job, and the Chief Constable
controlled the organisation.</p>

<p>Next morning after he had brought his notes of
the case to date, French left the hotel, and walking
in the leisurely, rather aimless fashion he affected
in the little town, approached the church. It had
occurred to him that he would spend his enforced
leisure in an examination of the cemeteries in the
immediate district, to see if any local conditions
would favour the operations of a body-snatcher.</p>

<p>Owing to the renovation, the church gate was
open and French, passing through, turned into the
graveyard surrounding the picturesque old
building. It also was old—old and completely filled
with graves. As French leisurely strolled round
the paths, he could not find a single vacant lot.
Even on the wall of the church itself there were
monuments, one of which bore the date 1573 and
none of which were later than 1800. Though the
place was carefully tended there were no signs of
recent interments, and French was not therefore
surprised to learn from one of the workmen that
there was a new cemetery at the opposite end of the
town.</p>

<p>He stood looking round, considering the
possibilities of grave robbing. The church was almost in
the centre of the town and the graveyard was
surrounded on all sides by houses. In front was the
old High Street, fenced off by a tall iron railing
and with a continuous row of houses and shops
opposite. The other three sides were bounded by a
six-foot wall, the two ends abutting on the gables and
yards of the High Street houses, and the back on a
narrow street called Church Lane, again with houses
all the way along its opposite side. There were
heavy wrought iron gates leading to both Church
Lane and High Street.</p>

<p>The longer French examined the place, the more
certain he became that the robbery of a grave by
less than three or four persons was an absolute
impossibility. However, he saw the sexton and made
sure that both gates were locked on the night in
question.</p>

<p>He next paid a similar visit to the new cemetery.
Here the difficulties were not quite so overwhelming
as it was farther from the town and much less
overlooked. At the same time even here they were so
great as to make theft practically impossible.</p>

<p>In the afternoon he tramped to the only other
cemetery in the district—that of a village some three
miles north-east of Starvel. But again his investigations
met with a negative result and he definitely
put out of his mind the theory that Roper had
robbed a grave.</p>

<p>For two days he kicked his heels in Thirsby,
hoping against hope that he would hear something from
Major Valentine and wondering whether he should
not go back to London, and then he accidentally
learned a fact which gave him a new idea and started
him off on a fresh line of investigation.</p>

<p>As a forlorn hope it had occurred to him that he
would call again on Ruth Averill to inquire whether
she could think of any one who might have visited
Starvel after she left for York. He did not expect
an affirmative reply, but he thought the inquiry
would pass the time as profitably as anything else.</p>

<p>Ruth, however, had known of no one.</p>

<p>“We never had a visitor, Mr. French,” she went
on, “rarely or ever. Except those three or four calls
of Mr. Whymper’s of which I told you, I don’t
think a single person had come to the place for a
year. Why should they?”</p>

<p>“It must have been lonely for you,” French said
sympathetically.</p>

<p>“It was lonely. I didn’t realise it at the time,
except just after coming back from school, but now
that I have plenty of people to speak to I see how
very lonely it was.”</p>

<p>“You didn’t feel able to make confidants of the
Ropers? Of course,” French went on hastily, “I
know they were only servants, but still many
servants are worthy of the fullest confidence.”</p>

<p>Ruth shook her head.</p>

<p>“No, I didn’t feel that I could make friends with
either. It was not in the least because they were
servants. Some of the cottagers were even lower
socially, and yet they were real friends. But there
was something repellent about the Ropers, or at
least I thought so. I was never happy with either
of them. And yet both were kind and attentive and
all that. Of course, there was Mr. Giles. He was
always friendly, and I enjoyed helping him with his
insects. But I didn’t really see a great deal of him.”</p>

<p>French felt sorry for the young girl, as he thought
of the unhappy life she must have led.</p>

<p>“I think I understand how you feel,” he returned
gently. “Personality is a wonderful thing, is it not?
It is quite intangible, but one recognises it and acts
on it instinctively. And that Mr. Giles whom you
mentioned. Who is he, if it is not an impertinent
question?”</p>

<p>“Oh, he is dead,” Ruth answered sadly and with
some surprise in her tones. “Did you not hear about
him? He lived close to Starvel—at least, about
half a mile away—but his cottage was the nearest
house. He was dreadfully delicate and, I am afraid,
rather badly off. He was wounded in the War and
was never afterwards able to work. He was
interested in insects and kept bees. He collected
butterflies and beetles and wrote articles about them.
Sometimes I used to help him to pin out his
specimens. He taught me a lot about them.”</p>

<p>“And you say he died?”</p>

<p>“Yes, wasn’t it tragic? The poor man died just
at the time of the Starvel affair. It was too terrible.
When I came back from York I found he had gone
too.”</p>

<p>French almost leaped off his seat as he heard
these words. Was it possible that in his careless,
half-interested inquiries he had blundered on to the
one outstanding fact that he needed? Could it be
that Mr. Giles’ death represented Roper’s search
for a body? That he was his third victim?</p>

<p>Crushing down his eagerness French did his best
to simulate a polite and sympathetic interest.</p>

<p>“How terrible for you, Miss Averill!” he said
with as real feeling in his tones as he could compass.
“One shock added to another. Tell me about it, if
it is not too painful a recollection.”</p>

<p>“Oh no, I’ll tell you. He fell ill a few days
before I went to York—influenza, Mrs. Roper
thought, but he must have been fairly bad as he
had Dr. Philpot out to see him. Both the Ropers
were certainly very good to him. They went up and
nursed him, for the woman who usually looked after
him had not time to stay with him for more than an
hour or so in the day. I went up and sat with him
occasionally, too. On the morning I went to York
he seemed much worse. I called on my way into
Thirsby, and he was lying without moving and was
terribly white and feeble looking. His voice also
was very faint. He just said he was comfortable
and had everything he wanted. Mrs. Roper said
that if he didn’t soon get better she would send
Roper in for Dr. Emerson. Dr. Philpot, I should
explain, had just gone down with influenza.”</p>

<p>“And what was the next thing you heard?”</p>

<p>“Why,” Ruth made a little gesture of horror,
“the next thing I knew of it was that we met the
funeral. It was awful. It was the second day after
the fire. I wanted to go out and see Starvel, and
Mrs. Oxley drove me out in their car. When we
were coming back, just as we reached the point
where the Starvel road branches off, we saw a
funeral coming in along the main road. It was trotting
and we waited to let it pass on. Mr. Stackpool—that’s
the vicar—and Dr. Emerson were there and
they told us whose it was. Of course we joined
them. <em>Poor</em> Mr. Giles. I <em>was</em> sorry for him. But
nothing could have been done. Dr. Emerson said
he became unconscious the same day that I saw him,
and passed away without suffering. That was
something to be thankful for at least.”</p>

<p>“Indeed, yes,” French agreed with feeling. “I
wonder if I haven’t heard about Mr. Giles. He
was a very tall old man, wasn’t he, and walked with
a stoop?”</p>

<p>“Oh no, he wasn’t specially tall or old either.
Just medium height and middle age, I should say.
Nor did he walk with a stoop. You must be
thinking of some one else.”</p>

<p>“I suppose I must,” French admitted, and as soon
as he reasonably could he took his leave.</p>

<p>That he now held in his hand the solution of the
mystery he no longer doubted. He would have
wagered ten years of his life that this Giles’ remains
had been taken from the wreck of Starvel and
interred under the name of John Roper. Such a
supposition, moreover, was consistent with the
medical evidence. Dr. Emerson had stated at the inquest
that the third body was that of a man of middle
height and middle age. This, of course, had been
taken as applying to Roper, but it might equally
apply to Giles. It was certainly a lucky thing for
Roper’s scheme that a person so suitable for his
diabolical purpose should happen to live so near
to the scene of the crime. Or more probably, it
was this very fact that had suggested the idea of
the substitution to Roper.</p>

<p>But if Giles had been murdered, what about Dr.
Emerson’s certificate? In this wretched case the
solution of one problem only seemed to lead to
another. French felt that he had still further work
before him ere he could begin the second stage of
his case—the search for Roper. Lost in thought he
returned to the Thirsdale Arms for lunch.</p>

</div>

<div class="chapter" id="ch12">

<h2>CHAPTER TWELVE: A Somewhat Gruesome Chapter</h2>

<p>To inquire of a fully fledged and responsible
medical man whether he has or has not given a
false death certificate, without at the same time
ruffling his feelings is an undertaking requiring a nice
judgment and not a little tact. As French once
again climbed the steps to Dr. Emerson’s hall door
early that same afternoon, he felt that the coming
interview would tax even his powers of suave
inquiry. In a way, of course, it didn’t matter whether
the doctor’s feelings were ruffled or not, but both
on general principles and from a desire to prevent
his witness becoming hostile, the detective was
anxious to save the other’s face.</p>

<p>“How are you, doctor? Here I am back to worry
you again,” French began pleasantly as he was
shown in to the consulting-room. They chatted for
a few moments and then French went on: “I wanted
to ask you in confidence about an acquaintance of
Miss Averill’s, a Mr. Giles who died recently. You
knew him?”</p>

<p>“I attended him. I attended him for some years
until Dr. Philpot came, then he took him over as
well as most of my other country patients. I am not
so young as I was and the arrangement suited us
both. He died while Dr. Philpot was ill, and I
went out and gave the necessary certificate.”</p>

<p>“So I gathered, and that’s why I came to you.
What a curious coincidence it was that this man
should pass away at the very time of the fire! That
all four of Miss Averill’s closest acquaintances
should die at practically the same time is, you must
admit, as strange as it is tragic.”</p>

<p>Emerson looked at his visitor curiously.</p>

<p>“Strange enough and tragic enough, I admit,” he
answered, “but such coincidences are not infrequent.
It is my experience that coincidences which would
be deemed too remarkable for a novel constantly
occur in real life.”</p>

<p>“I quite agree with you. I have often said the
same thing. Mr. Giles was an invalid, was he not?”</p>

<p>“Yes, from what he told me the poor fellow had
a rather miserable life. He was always delicate,
and when he volunteered in 1914, he was rejected
because of his heart. As the war dragged on the
authorities became less particular and in 1917 he
was re-examined and passed for foreign service,
wrongly, as I think. However, that’s what
happened. He went to France and in less than a month
he was in hospital, having been both gassed and
wounded. As a result his heart became more
seriously affected. Even five years ago he was in a state
in which death might have occurred from a sudden
shock, and myocarditis is a complaint which does
not improve as the years pass.”</p>

<p>“Then it was myocarditis he died of?”</p>

<p>“Yes. He had an attack of influenza on the
previous Thursday. When Dr. Philpot got laid
up and asked me to take his patients over he told
me he had seen Mr. Giles and that he was in a bad
way. The influenza made an extra call on the poor
man’s heart which no doubt hastened his end, but
the actual cause of death was myocarditis.”</p>

<p>“Does this disease leave any infallible signs after
death? I mean, can a doctor say definitely from
the mere inspection of the remains that death was
due to it and to no other cause? Don’t think me
impertinent in asking. I told you we inspectors
were always out after first-hand information.”</p>

<p>Dr. Emerson raised his eyebrows as if to indicate
delicately that the question was perhaps not in
the best taste, but with only the slightest hint of
stiffness he replied:—</p>

<p>“In this case the question does not arise. This
man was in a serious condition of health; his heart
might have failed at any moment. Moreover, he
was suffering from influenza, which puts an extra
strain on the heart. Dr. Philpot gave it as his
opinion that he would not recover. When therefore I
learned that he had died suddenly I was not
surprised. It was only to be expected. Further, when
I examined him he showed every sign of death from
heart failure.”</p>

<p>“But that is just the point, doctor. Excuse my
pressing it, but I really am interested. For my own
information I should like to know whether these
signs that you speak of were absolutely peculiar to
a death from heart disease. I understood, please
correct me if I am wrong, but I understood that
only an autopsy could really establish the point
beyond question.”</p>

<p>Dr. Emerson hesitated.</p>

<p>“These are very peculiar questions,” he said
presently. “I think you should tell me what is in your
mind. It seems to me that I am equally entitled to
ask how the death of Mr. Giles affects the cause of
the Starvel fire?”</p>

<p>French nodded, and drawing forward his chair,
spoke more confidentially.</p>

<p>“You are, doctor. I had not intended to
mention my suspicion, but since you have asked me, I’ll
answer your question. I will ask you to keep what
I am about to say very strictly to yourself, and on
that understanding I must tell you that I’m not
connected with an insurance company: I’m an
inspector from Scotland Yard. Certain facts which I
do not wish to go into at present have led me to
suspect that Mr. Giles may have been murdered.
I want to make sure.”</p>

<p>Dr. Emerson stared as if he couldn’t have
believed his ears, and his jaw dropped.</p>

<p>“God bless my soul!” he cried. “<em>Murdered?</em>
Did I hear you say murdered?”</p>

<p>“Yes,” said French, “but I am not sure about it.
It is only a suspicion.”</p>

<p>“A pretty nasty suspicion for me, after my
certificate! But you couldn’t be right. The very idea
is absurd! Who could have murdered such a
harmless man, and badly off at that!”</p>

<p>“Well, I think it might be possible to find a
motive. But if you don’t mind, I’d really rather not
discuss what may prove to be a mare’s nest.
However, you see now the object of my questions. I
want to know the possibilities from the medical
point of view. Perhaps you will tell me about that
autopsy?”</p>

<p>Dr. Emerson was manifestly disturbed by
French’s suggestion. He moved uneasily in his
chair and gave vent to exclamations of scepticism
and concern. “Of course,” he went on, “I’ll tell
you everything I can, and I needn’t say I most
sincerely hope your suspicion is unfounded. You are
perfectly correct on the other point. Only an
autopsy can establish beyond question the fact of a
death from myocarditis. If I had had the slightest
doubt in Mr. Giles’ case I should have required one
before giving a certificate. But I had no doubt, and
with all due respect to you I have none now.”</p>

<p>“You may be right, doctor. I’ll tell you as soon
as I know myself. In the meantime thank you for
your information and not a word to a soul.”</p>

<p>French left the house with a deep satisfaction
filling his mind. Dr. Emerson’s admission was what
he had hoped for and it very nearly banished his
last remaining doubt. But he felt that he ought to
get Dr. Philpot’s views also. Philpot had seen the
man before death and his evidence would certainly
be required if the matter went further.</p>

<p>Accordingly, he turned in the direction of the
younger man’s house, and a few minutes later was
entering a consulting-room for the second time that
day.</p>

<p>“Good-afternoon, doctor,” he said, with his
usual cheery smile. “I’ve come on my old tack of
looking for information. But it’s a very simple
matter this time: just one question on quite a different
subject.”</p>

<p>Dr. Philpot was looking changed: old and worn
and despondent. French was rather shocked at his
appearance. He was sitting forward in his chair,
hunched over the fire, with his head resting in his
hands and a look of brooding misery on his
features. He looked like a man upon whom a long
expected blow had at last fallen; a man at the end
of his tether, who does not know which way to turn
for relief. And then, somewhat to French’s
surprise, the cause came out.</p>

<p>“Of course, of course,” the other murmured,
rousing himself as if from an evil dream. “If you
want to know anything from me ask it now, for
I’m leaving the town almost at once.”</p>

<p>French was genuinely surprised.</p>

<p>“Leaving the town?” he repeated. “You don’t
mean——? Do you mean for good?”</p>

<p>“For good, yes. And I don’t want ever to see
the cursed place again. But it’s my own fault. I
may as well tell you, for you’ll hear it soon enough.
I have failed.”</p>

<p>“Financially, you mean?”</p>

<p>Philpot glanced at his visitor with sombre
resentment.</p>

<p>“Financially, of course. How else?” he growled.
“It was never a land flowing with milk and honey,
this place, but for the last few months my position
has been getting more and more impossible. The
only things I get plenty of are bills—bills
everywhere, and no money to meet them. I’ve struggled
and fought to keep my end up, but it has been no
good. When I came, I couldn’t afford to buy a
practice, and though I’ve not done so badly owing
to Dr. Emerson’s giving up his more distant
patients, I haven’t built up quickly enough and my little
capital couldn’t stand the strain. Another three or
four years and I might have got my head above
water.” He made a gesture of despair. “But there
it is and complaining won’t help it.”</p>

<p>French’s natural reaction was to show sympathy
with any one in trouble, and he could not help feeling
sorry for this doctor who had made a mess of his
life and who now, nearing middle age, was going to
have to begin all over again. But when he remembered
what the landlord of the Thirsdale Arms had
told him of the man’s gambling proclivities, his
sympathy was somewhat checked. To continue
gambling when you know that your indulgence is
going to prevent your paying your just debts is but
a short way removed from theft. Of course, French
did not know how far the landlord’s story was true,
so it was with relief that he reminded himself that
he was not Philpot’s judge, and that his business
was simply to get the information he required as
easily and pleasantly as he could.</p>

<p>“I am exceedingly sorry to hear what you say,”
he declared gravely, and he was not altogether a
hypocrite in making his manner and tone express
genuine regret. “It is a terrible position for any
one to find himself in and I can well understand how
you feel. But, though bad, you must not consider it
hopeless. Many a man has passed through a similar
trouble and has come out on top in the end.”</p>

<p>Philpot smiled faintly.</p>

<p>“I appreciate your kindness,” he answered. “But
don’t let us talk about it. I told you in order to
explain my departure and because you would hear
it in any case. But if you don’t mind, I would
rather not speak of it again. You said something
about a question, I think?”</p>

<p>“Yes, but first I must ask just this. You say you
are leaving here. Suppose through some unexpected
development in this Starvel case you are wanted to
give evidence. Can I find you?”</p>

<p>“Of course. I am going to a friend in Glasgow
who says he can find me a job. I shall be staying
with Mrs. MacIntosh, of 47 Kilgore Street,
Dumbarton Road.”</p>

<p>French noted the address.</p>

<p>“Thanks. I do not think I shall want you, but I
should be remiss in my duty if I failed to keep in
touch with you. The other question is about a
friend of Miss Averill’s, a man named Giles, who
died about the time of the fire. I wish you would
tell me what he died of.”</p>

<p>Dr. Philpot looked at him in surprise. Then
something approaching a twinkle appeared in his
eye.</p>

<p>“Hullo! Another—er—unexpected
development? Is it indiscreet to inquire?”</p>

<p>“It is,” French answered, “but I’ll tell you
because I really want my information. It may be a
very serious matter, Dr. Philpot, and I am
mentioning it in strict confidence only. I have certain
reasons to suppose that Mr. Giles may have been
murdered and I want to get your views on the
possibility.”</p>

<p>Dr. Philpot’s astonishment at the announcement
was quite as marked as that of his <i lang="fr">confrère</i>, but he
made less effort to conceal his scepticism.</p>

<p>“My dear Inspector! You’re surely not serious?
Giles? Oh come now, you don’t expect me to
believe that? What possible motive could any one
have for doing such a thing?”</p>

<p>French did not explain the motive. He said he
didn’t claim infallibility and admitted he might be
wrong in his theory. He was simply collecting facts
and he wanted any the other could supply.</p>

<p>“Well,” Philpot declared, “these are the facts so
far as I know them.” He crossed over to an index,
and rapidly looking through it, withdrew a card.
“This is the man’s record. He was seriously ill to
begin with: he had a heart affection which might
have killed him at any moment. I have attended
him for years and his disease was growing worse.
His life in fact was precarious. That is your first
fact.</p>

<p>“The second is that during the week before his
death he developed influenza. I went out and saw
him on the Thursday. I believed that his days were
numbered and I expected to hear of his death at
any time. He did die, if I remember correctly, on
the following Tuesday. I did not see him then, as
I was myself down with ’flu, but Dr. Emerson saw
him and he can tell you if his death was natural. I
don’t know, Inspector, what you are basing your
opinion on, but I can say with certainty that I shall
be surprised if you are right.”</p>

<p>“It is your outlook on the matter which most
strongly supports my suspicion,” French rejoined:
“yours and Dr. Emerson’s, for I have seen him and
his is the same. He was expecting that Mr. Giles
would die from his disease, consequently when he
did die he assumed that the disease was the cause.
Perfectly naturally, mind you: I’m not criticising
him. But my point is that his preconceived idea
made him less critical than he might otherwise have
been.”</p>

<p>“Ingenious no doubt, but to me unconvincing.
However, it is not my affair, but yours. Is there
any other question that you wish me to answer?”</p>

<p>French rapidly reflected. He thought that there
was nothing more. Between these two men he had
got what he wanted.</p>

<p>“I don’t think there is, doctor,” he returned.
“I’m afraid your information hasn’t helped me on
much, but after all it was facts that I wanted. I’ll
not detain you any longer. Allow me just to say
that I hope your present difficulties will be
short-lived and that you may soon settle down
satisfactorily again.”</p>

<p>So, as far as the medical testimony was concerned,
his theory about Giles’ murder might well be true.
Dr. Emerson had really been very lax and yet,
French imagined, most medical men in similar
circumstances would have acted as he had done. But
whether that was so or not, Emerson had jumped
to conclusions and had signed the death certificate
without having really taken any trouble to ascertain
the cause of death. And this, if necessary, he could
be made to admit in the witness box.</p>

<p>French saw that only one thing would settle the
matter. Giles’ coffin must be opened and the
contents examined.</p>

<p>To obtain the necessary powers from the Home
Office was a simple matter in London, where the
request could be put through direct from the Yard.
But here in Yorkshire it must come from the local
authorities. French decided therefore that his
proper course would be to put the additional facts
that he had learned before Major Valentine and let
that officer see to the rest. It was not a matter
upon which he cared to telephone or write, so
having made an appointment by wire, he once again
took the afternoon train for Leeds.</p>

<p>“I believe, sir, that I have found where that third
body was obtained,” he began, as he took his seat
for the second time in the Chief Constable’s room.
“It is, of course, only theory, indeed, you might
almost say guess-work, but I think it works in. The
nearest inhabitant to Starvel, a man living alone,
died on the night before the fire.” French went on
to relate in detail what took place and to give his
views thereon.</p>

<p>The Chief Constable heard him in silence, and
then sat for some moments thinking the matter over.</p>

<p>“I’m afraid I don’t feel so sanguine about it as
you seem to,” he said at last. “At the same time
I agree that the matter must be settled by an
examination of the coffin. But I shall be surprised if
Giles’ body is not found within it.”</p>

<p>“It may be, sir, of course,” French admitted.
“But I’m glad you agree that we should make sure.
In that case there is no object in delay. Will you
obtain the necessary exhumation order, or is there
anything you wish me to do in the matter?”</p>

<p>“No, I’ll see to it. You may arrange with Kent
to get the work done. Let Kent arrange for a
magistrate to be present. A representative will be
required from the Home Office, of course?”</p>

<p>“I’m afraid so, sir.”</p>

<p>“Then you may expect the order in a day or two.
I shall be very much interested to hear the result.
It will be impossible to keep the affair quiet?”</p>

<p>“I’m afraid so. There will be too many
concerned in it.”</p>

<p>“Quite. Well, you must get up some tale about
it. What are you going to say?”</p>

<p>“I haven’t thought yet, sir. I’ll dish out
something when the time comes.”</p>

<p>When French reached Hellifield on his return
journey he found Oxley on the platform.</p>

<p>“You been travelling also, Inspector?” Oxley
greeted him. “I’ve just been to Penrith for the
day. These connections always make me curse.
They’re all arranged to and from Leeds, but people
going to or from the north have to kick their heels
here for the best part of an hour each way.”</p>

<p>“Can’t please everybody, Mr. Oxley,” French
remarked tritely.</p>

<p>“You think not?” Oxley smiled. “Well, how’s
the case?”</p>

<p>“Nothing doing for the moment. I was in seeing
Dr. Philpot this morning. He seems in a bad way,
poor fellow.”</p>

<p>Oxley looked grave.</p>

<p>“It’s a bad case, I fear.” He glanced round and
his voice sank. “From what I’ve heard and by
putting two and two together I shouldn’t wonder if
he’ll only pay two or three shillings in the pound.
All gone to the bookies, or nearly all. You know,
Inspector, between ourselves, when a man’s in debt
all round, as he is, it’s not just the game to go
putting his last few pounds on horses.”</p>

<p>“It’s a fact, Mr. Oxley. Of course, one must
remember that the gambler plunges in the hope of
pulling something off. If he had had some bits of
luck he might have put himself square.”</p>

<p>“That’s true, and you can imagine any one taking
the risk. If he wins his whole trouble is over, while
if he loses he is little the worse. He may as well be
hanged for a sheep as a lamb. But you haven’t told
me how the case is getting on.”</p>

<p>It was natural enough that Oxley should be
interested in his investigations, but French thought he
pushed his curiosity a little too far. They met fairly
often—sometimes, he thought, not entirely by
accident—and every time Oxley made a dead set at
him to learn what he was doing and if he had
reached any conclusions. French did not like being
pumped, and as a result he became closer than ever.
On this occasion it taxed even his skill to put the
solicitor off without unpleasantly plain speaking,
but he managed it at last and the talk drifted into
other channels. Oxley was in his usual state of
rather boisterous good humor, and before the train
stopped at Thirsby he regaled French with the
gossip of the district and told a number of the highly
flavoured stories in which his soul delighted.</p>

<p>Coincidence ordained that French should meet
at the station the one person whose curiosity as to
the progress of the investigation was even keener
than Oxley’s—Tarkington’s clerk, Bloxham.
Bloxham never lost an opportunity of fishing for
information, and French had little doubt that their
frequent “unexpected” meetings were carefully
prearranged. On the present occasion the man joined
French with a “Walking to the hotel, Mr. French?
I’m just going that way too,” and immediately
began to ask leading questions. But French’s feelings
were still somewhat ruffled from his encounter
with Oxley, and for once Bloxham received as direct
and decisive a reply as his heart could wish.</p>

<p>“Sorry, Mr. French,” he stammered, staring at
French in considerable surprise. “I’m afraid we
outsiders must bother you a lot. I was interested
because of the notes, you understand, but of course
if the thing is confidential that’s another matter.”</p>

<p>“That’s all right,” French returned, recovering
his temper. “Come and have a drink.”</p>

<p>Two days later the exhumation order came, and
that same night shortly after twelve o’clock a little
party emerged from the local police station, and
separating at the door, set off by various routes in
the direction of the cemetery. Inspector French
walked down the High Street with Dr. Laming, the
Home Office representative, Sergeant Kent with
Colonel Followes, the local magistrate from whom
French had obtained the warrant for Whymper’s
arrest, went via Cross Lane, while a sturdy
policeman armed with tools disappeared down a parallel
street.</p>

<p>The night was dark and cloudy, with a cold
south-westerly wind which gave promise of early rain.
There was a thin crescent moon, though its light
penetrated but slightly through the pall of cloud.
The men shivered and turned up their collars as they
faced the raw damp air.</p>

<p>The five met within the gates of the cemetery,
which were opened to them by the caretaker and
relocked behind them. Two gravediggers were in
attendance. In the darkness and silence the little
company moved off, and led by the caretaker, crossed
the ground towards its north-easterly corner.</p>

<p>The place was very secluded. It lay on the side
of a gently sloping hill whose curving bulk screened
it from the town. It was tastefully laid out and
well kept, but to the little party, with their minds
full of their gruesome mission, it seemed eerie and
sinister. The shrubs and bushes which French had
so much admired on his previous visit, now
presented shadowy and menacing forms which moved
and changed their positions as the men passed on.
Presently a beam from an acetylene bicycle lamp
flashed out and the caretaker called a halt.</p>

<p>“This is it,” he said in a low voice, pointing to
the long narrow mound of a grave.</p>

<p>Silently the two gravediggers advanced, and
stretching a tarpaulin on the grass alongside the
mound, began to remove the sods. Then they dug,
first through dark soil and then through yellow,
which they heaped up in a pyramid on the tarpaulin.
They worked steadily, but a whole hour had passed
before with a dull thud a spade struck something
hollow.</p>

<p>“We’re down at last,” the caretaker said, while
the diggers redoubled their efforts.</p>

<p>Gradually the top of the coffin became revealed
and the men, undermining the walls of their
excavation, worked the clay out from round the sides.
Presently all was clear.</p>

<p>As the interment had taken place only some two
months earlier the coffin was still perfectly sound.
Raising it was therefore an easy matter. Ropes
were lowered and passed through the handles, and
with a steady pull, the sinister casket came away
from the clay beneath and in a few seconds was
lying on the grass beside the hole. French, holding
his electric torch to the brass plate, could read the
inscription: “Markham Giles, died 14th September,
1926. Aged 36.”</p>

<p>Meanwhile the sturdy policeman had come
forward with a screwdriver and was beginning to
withdraw the screws holding down the lid. Every one
but the case-hardened Home Office official felt a
thrill of excitement pass over him as the fateful
moment approached. Only Dr. Laming and French
had before taken part in an exhumation, and the
feelings of the others were stirred by the gruesome
nature of the operations and thoughts of the ghastly
sight which they expected would soon meet their
eyes. With French it was different. He was moved
because his reputation was at stake. So much
depended for him on what that raised lid would reveal.
If he had put all concerned to the trouble and
expense of an unnecessary exhumation, it would count
against him. He found it hard to stand still and to
preserve a suitable attitude of aloofness while the
constable slowly operated the screwdriver.</p>

<p>At last the screws were removed and the lid was
carefully raised and lifted clear. And then the eyes
which had been bulging with anticipated horror,
bulged still more with incredulous amazement.
There was no sign of Markham Giles’ body or any
other! Instead, the coffin was half-full of dark,
peaty earth; and when this earth was sifted nothing
was found embedded in it.</p>

<p>The sight produced varying emotions in the
onlookers. The uninitiated broke into exclamations
of wonder: French felt such a wave of satisfaction
sweep through him that he could have shouted in his
delight: Dr. Laming contented himself with a quick
glance and a murmur of “One for you, French.
Congratulations.” All felt that they had assisted
in a unique experiment, the result of which had
triumphantly vindicated the authorities.</p>

<p>This, then, was the end of the mystery. The
conclusion which French had reached by analysis and
deduction had been tested and had proved true, and
that proof established at one and the same time the
whole of the steps of his line of reasoning. Roper
was guilty of one of the most diabolical plots ever
conceived in the mind of a criminal. He had allowed
nothing to stand in his way. He had sacrificed the
lives of no less than three people in order that he
might with the greater security steal his employer’s
money. Every part of his devilish scheme was made
clear, except one—his present whereabouts. French
determined that he would immediately begin to trace
him and that nothing would induce him to stop
until he had succeeded.</p>

<p>It was not long before the news of the discovery
leaked out. When French came down to breakfast
next morning he found three reporters waiting for
him, and he had hardly begun to speak to them
when a fourth arrived.</p>

<p>“That’s all right, gentlemen,” he said pleasantly.
“I am from Scotland Yard after all, and I’ll tell
you as much as I can. I only wish I knew more!
As to what may or may not lie behind it I cannot
hazard a guess; we are about to go into that. But
the fact is that we received secret information—I
can’t give away the source—you may say an
anonymous letter if you like—but information was
forthcoming which led us to believe that the poor
gentleman, Mr. Giles, had become the victim of a gang
of criminals. The story was to the effect that he had
been murdered by chloroform or poison, and that
after he had been coffined, the gang returned and
removed the body, disposing of it in some other way.
That was all, but it obviously suggested that the
gang in question was that of the burglars who, as
you are aware, have been active in these parts for
many months, and that they had emptied the coffin
in order to find a temporary safe deposit for their
booty. That, at all events, was a possible
explanation. On going into the matter I thought it was
worth while testing the story by exhuming the
coffin, and sure enough, the body was gone. But
the other suggestion about the burglars’ swag
wasn’t so happy. When we opened the coffin we
found it half-full of earth: about the weight of the
deceased. Needless to say we searched it
thoroughly, but there was nothing else in it. So,
whatever the motive of the crime, it was not to find a
safe hiding place for valuables.”</p>

<p>The reporters were voluble in their interest and
in the joy they evidently felt in the scoop vouchsafed
them.</p>

<p>“Some story that, Inspector,” they cried. “Tell
us more and we’ll give you a good write up.”</p>

<p>But French smilingly shook his head.</p>

<p>“Sorry it’s all I’m at liberty to give away,” he
declared. “Come now, gentlemen, I haven’t done
so badly for you. Plenty of men in my position
wouldn’t have told you anything.”</p>

<p>“But do you not think,” said one, the least
vociferous of the four, “that your theory may have
been right after all? Is it not possible that the stuff
was hidden in the coffin as you suggested, but was
dug up and removed by the gang before you made
your exhumation?”</p>

<p>“I thought of that,” French declared brazenly,
“and you may be right, though there were no signs
of it. However, that is one of the things to be
gone into.”</p>

<p>When French had breakfasted he went to see the
undertaker who had conducted Giles’ funeral, and
there he received some information which still more
firmly established the theory he had evolved.</p>

<p>“The whole arrangements,” explained Mr.
Simkins, the proprietor, in the course of the
conversation, “were carried out to Mr. Roper’s orders.
Mr. Roper said that Mr. Giles had had an idea he
mightn’t get over the attack, and he had handed
him the money for his funeral, asking him to see to
it as he had no relative to do it. There were twelve
pounds over when the ground was bought, and Mr.
Roper handed the money to me and told me to do
the best I could with it. He said he thought the
best plan would be to get the body coffined that
afternoon—it was a Wednesday—and have the
funeral on the Friday. He said the doctor thought
the coffining should be done as soon as possible,
and while the day of the interment didn’t really
matter, Friday would suit as well as any. That was
the reason he gave for the arrangement, for you
know, sir, in inexpensive funerals at such a distance,
we generally do the coffining just before the funeral
and so make the one journey do. But that was the
way it was done.”</p>

<p>“I understand,” French continued. “Mr. Giles
died on the Tuesday, the coffining was done on the
Wednesday, and the funeral took place on the
Friday. That right?”</p>

<p>“That’s right, sir.”</p>

<p>It seemed to French that the undertaker’s
statement demonstrated the sole remaining steps of
Roper’s plan so completely that every detail of that
hideous night now stood revealed in all its
ghastliness. He had not only murdered Markham Giles,
but he had arranged that the body should lie coffined
in the lonely house on the night of the major
tragedy. On that night he and probably Mrs. Roper
must have opened the coffin, taken out the remains,
replaced them with the proper weight of earth, and
once more screwed down the lid. A small handcart
such as French had noticed in the unburnt outhouse
at Starvel would serve to convey the remains to the
Hollow, where they were to be used in such a terrible
way to bolster up the deception.</p>

<p>Truly, it was a well-thought-out scheme! And
how nearly had it succeeded! But its success would
be short-lived. With set teeth and frowning brow
French vowed to himself that he would not rest
until he had the monster who had done this deed
safely under lock and key.</p>

</div>

<div class="chapter" id="ch13">

<h2>CHAPTER THIRTEEN: The Piece of Yellow Clay</h2>

<p>All that day Inspector French’s thoughts kept
reverting to that tense moment in the cemetery when
the lid of the coffin had been raised and his theory
had been so dramatically established. The memory
filled his mind with a deep satisfaction. He felt
that he had achieved nothing less than a veritable
triumph. Other cases he had handled well, indeed
he thought he might say brilliantly. But in no
previous case had he solved his problem by such a
creative effort of the imagination. He had imagined
what might have happened, he had tested his
theory, and he had found it had happened. The
highest kind of work, this! His superiors could
not fail to be impressed.</p>

<p>But there was more than that in it. Seldom had
he known of a case which contained such arresting
and dramatic features. When the facts became
known they would make something more than a nine
days’ wonder. The old miser, living meanly in his
decaying house at the bottom of that sinister hollow
on the lonely moor; the hoarded thousands in his
safe; the terrible conflagration which wiped out in
a night the whole building and everything it
contained; the discovery that the tragedy was no
accident, but that murder lurked behind it; the other
murder, when Markham Giles was done to death
for a purpose too dreadful and gruesome to
contemplate without a thrill of horror; these things would
make the Starvel Hollow crime re-echo round the
world. It would be the crime of the century. No
one could fail to be moved by it.</p>

<p>And all would react to his, French’s advantage.
For a moment he allowed himself to dream. Chief
Inspector Armstrong was getting old. He must
soon retire . . . French ran over in his mind his
possible successors. Yes, it was conceivable . . .
With this brilliant case to his credit it was almost
likely . . . A ravishing prospect!</p>

<p>But French was at heart too sound a man to waste
time in day-dreaming while there was work to be
done. He had pulled off a <i lang="fr">coup</i> and had every
reason to be pleased with himself, but he had not
completed his case. He had solved his problem, but
he had not found his criminal. Until Roper was
under lock and key he could not relax his efforts or
look for his reward.</p>

<p>As he went over, point by point, all that he knew
of the missing man, he saw that there were two
matters upon which he should obtain further
information before starting his search. Roper’s statement
to the undertaker was capable of verification. Had
Dr. Emerson stated that Giles’ body required to be
coffined without delay? If Roper had lied on this
point, it would still further confirm the case against
him. The second matter was a search of Giles’
cottage. It was not a hopeful line of inquiry
certainly, but it could not be neglected. Some clue to
the tragedy might be forthcoming.</p>

<p>First, then, it was necessary to see Dr. Emerson,
and a few minutes later French was seated once
again in his consulting-room. The doctor greeted
him anxiously.</p>

<p>“I’m glad you called, Inspector,” he exclaimed.
“I was going up to the hotel to look for you. This
is a terrible development.”</p>

<p>“You’ve heard then, Dr. Emerson?”</p>

<p>“Just this moment. I met Kent and he told me.
It is an amazing affair, almost incredible. What
does it all mean, Mr. French? Can you
understand it?”</p>

<p>“I am afraid, sir, it means what I said on my last
call; that Mr. Giles was murdered.”</p>

<p>Dr. Emerson made an impatient gesture.</p>

<p>“But good gracious, man, that doesn’t explain it!
Suppose he was murdered: where is his body? Have
you a theory?”</p>

<p>French hesitated. He felt tempted to disclose
his suspicions to this old man, whose interest and
good faith were so self-evident. But his habit of
caution was too strong.</p>

<p>“I have a theory, Dr. Emerson,” he answered,
“but so far it is only a theory and I don’t like to
discuss it until I am reasonably sure it is true. I
shall know in a short time and then I will tell you.
In the meantime perhaps you will excuse me. But
I want to ask you one more question. Roper saw
you about the funeral arrangements?”</p>

<p>“Yes. He said that Giles had given him some
money for the purpose and that he would see that
the best use was made of it.”</p>

<p>“You thought it necessary, I understand, to have
the coffining done without delay?”</p>

<p>Dr. Emerson looked up sharply.</p>

<p>“I thought it necessary? Certainly not. You’re
mistaken there.”</p>

<p>“Is that so?” French returned. “I thought you
had told Roper that it must be hurried on. You
didn’t?”</p>

<p>“Never. I never even discussed the matter with
him. I never thought of it. As a matter of fact
there was no need to depart in any way from the
usual procedure.”</p>

<p>“That’s all right, doctor. Now there is one
other point. Let us assume that murder was
committed. I want you to tell me from the appearance
of the body how that murder might have been done.
If you are able to do so it might lead me to a clue.”</p>

<p>Emerson sprang to his feet and began pacing the
room.</p>

<p>“Merciful powers! That’s a nice question to ask
me, after my giving a certificate of death from
myocarditis!” he exclaimed.</p>

<p>“I know, doctor.” French spoke soothingly.
“But none of us are infallible, and if you made a
mistake it’s only what every one does at one time
or another. Your reasons for giving the certificate
were very convincing, and if they were not sound in
this case it is only because this case is one in a
million. Don’t worry about the certificate. Instead,
just sit down and recall the appearance of the body
and see if you can think of another cause of death.
If you’re not able to give a definite opinion we can
still get something by elimination. I take it, for
example, the man’s skull was not battered in nor his
throat cut? That limits the affair. You see what
I mean?”</p>

<p>“Oh, I see right enough, and naturally I’ll give
you all the help I can. But tell me first, have you
found the body?”</p>

<p>“No, nor have I the faintest idea where to look.
That will be my next job, I suppose. I don’t even
say it’s murder. But it may be, and if you can
answer my question it might be a considerable help.”</p>

<p>Dr. Emerson thought for some moments.</p>

<p>“Well,” he said at last, “I must admit that
murder is <em>possible</em>, though I don’t for a moment believe
death occurred otherwise than as I said. As to
possible methods, there were no obvious wounds on
the body and violence in the literal sense is
therefore unlikely. A sharp blow over the heart or on
the stomach might have caused heart failure without
leaving physical marks, but in such a case the
features would have looked distressed. For the same
reason death from the shock of a sudden fright or
start may be ruled out. It is of course true that
certain kinds of poison might have been
administered. A whiff of hydrocyanic acid gas would
cause almost instantaneous death and produce the
same appearance as death from natural causes. An
injection of cocaine would do the same where there
was heart disease, and there are other similar
agents. But in these cases the difficulty of the
average man in obtaining the substances in question
and also in knowing how to use them if obtained, is
so great that I think they might all be ruled out.
No, Inspector, amazing as your discovery seems, I
cannot think you are right in assuming murder.”</p>

<p>“But,” thought French, though he did not put his
thought into words, “if the man you suspect spent
the best years of his life as male nurse in a medical
institution, these difficulties pretty well vanish.”
But he concealed his satisfaction, and, instead,
simulated disappointment.</p>

<p>“That seems very reasonable, doctor, I must
admit. At the same time I shall have to put
inquiries in hand as to whether any one recently tried
to obtain cocaine or those other things you have
mentioned. Of course, I don’t say that necessarily
I am right in my ideas.”</p>

<p>“I don’t think you are right, though I confess I’m
absolutely lost in amazement about that coffin.
Come now, Inspector, you must know more than
you pretend. Are your ideas hopelessly
confidential?”</p>

<p>French shook his head, then said, “I can tell you,
doctor, that I know nothing more than I have
already mentioned. I may have a surmise, but you
will agree that I could not repeat mere surmises
which might also be slanders against perfectly
innocent persons. If I find that my theories seem to
have a basis on fact I may ask for your further help,
but at present I see no signs of that. You’ll agree
that I’m right?”</p>

<p>Emerson admitted it, and after some further
conversation French took his leave. So far everything
was going satisfactorily. Each new fact which he
learned tended to strengthen his theory. And
incidentally and unexpectedly he had come on another
piece of evidence, circumstantial of course, but none
the less strong. According to Dr. Emerson, the
murder was most likely to have been committed by
methods which Roper alone, of all the people that
French could think of, had the knowledge and the
ability to employ. French’s satisfaction was intense
as he noted the cumulative effect of his discoveries.
By this method of cumulative circumstantial
evidence was he accustomed to find suspicion grow to
certainty and certainty to proof.</p>

<p>So much for the first of the two inquiries French
had set himself to make. There remained the
investigation of the late Markham Giles’ cottage, and
after a snack of early lunch at the hotel, he started
out along the Starvel road.</p>

<p>It was dull and rather cold, but a pleasant day for
walking. French tramped along, enjoying the
motion and the extended view offered by the wide, open
spaces of the moor. Though, owing to the
atmosphere, the colouring was neither so warm nor so
rich as it had previously appeared, there was a
fascination in the scenery which strongly appealed
to him. He had found a similar though keener
charm in Dartmoor, which he had once explored
on the occasion of a visit to a cracksman doing time
in the great prison at Princetown. Indeed
Dartmoor and Exmoor both figured on his list of places
to be visited when time and money should permit.</p>

<p>Diverging from the Starvel road at the point
where Ruth Averill and Mrs. Oxley had joined the
deceased man’s funeral, French skirted the edge of
the Hollow and in a few minutes reached the
cottage. It was a tiny box of a place, but strongly
built, with stone walls and slated roof. Its
architecture was of the most rudimentary kind, a door
and two windows in front and at the back being the
only relieving features in the design. The house
stood a short distance back from the road in the
middle of a patch of cultivated ground. Behind
was a row of wooden beehives.</p>

<p>French looked round him. As far as he could see
he was the only living thing in all that stretch of
country. The town, nestling in the valley up which
he had come, was hidden from sight below the edge
of the moor. The three or four houses standing
at wide intervals apart seemed deserted. No one
appeared on the road or on the moor.</p>

<p>He walked up the little path to the door and
busied himself with the lock. It was too large for
his skeleton keys, but a few moments’ work with a
bit of bent wire did the trick, and presently he was
inside with the door closed behind him.</p>

<p>The house consisted of three rooms only, a
sitting-room, a bedroom, and a kitchen. A narrow
passage separated the last two of these, the front
portion of which formed a porch and the back a
pantry. The atmosphere was heavy and nauseating,
and this was soon explained by the fact that
everything seemed to have been left just where it was
when Giles died. The clothes were still on the bed
and there was mouldy and decaying food in the
pantry. Dust was thick over everything; indeed it
was a marvel to French where so much dust should
have come from in the heart of the country.</p>

<p>He opened the doors to let the atmosphere clear
and then began one of his meticulous examinations.
He did not expect to find anything of interest, yet
he searched as if the key to the whole mystery lay
waiting to be discovered. But after an hour he had
to admit failure. There was nothing in the place
from which he could get the slightest help.</p>

<p>Reluctantly he locked the doors and started back
to Thirsby. He walked slowly, scarcely conscious
of his surroundings as he racked his brains in the
hope of seeing some other clue which might bring
him more result. At first he could think of
nothing, then another line of investigation occurred
to him which, though it seemed hopelessly
unpromising, he thought he might pursue.</p>

<p>He had been thinking that if his main theory
were correct Giles’ body must have been conveyed
from his cottage to Starvel, probably during the
darkness of that tragic Wednesday night. How
had this been done? He had noticed in the single
outhouse of Starvel which remained unburnt a light
handcart, and it had before occurred to him that this
cart might have been used. He now thought he
would go down to Starvel and have another look at
the outhouse and this handcart. A miracle might
have happened and some helpful clue been left.</p>

<p>He turned aside from the road, and crossing the
lip of the Hollow, went down to the ruins in the
centre. The outhouse was a small stone shed built
up against the yard wall. Through the broken and
cobweb-covered window he could see that it
contained the handcart, a few gardening tools and some
old broken crates and other rubbish. The door was
secured with a rusty chain and padlock of which the
key had disappeared.</p>

<p>A few seconds’ work with his bent wire
unfastened the lock and he pushed open the door and
entered. The place was unspeakably dirty and he
moved gingerly about as he began to look over its
contents. But he was just as meticulous and
thorough in his examination as if it were the throne
room of a palace.</p>

<p>He had completed his work and was about to
retire disappointed when the presence of a small
scrap of yellow clay which he had observed on
entering, but to which he had given no attention, suddenly
struck him as being slightly puzzling. It was shaped
like a half-moon, the inner edge showing a definite
curve. Evidently it had caked round a man’s heel
and had dropped off, possibly as the heel had become
drier in the shed. French looked round and
presently he saw two more pieces. One was stuck to the
rim of the left wheel of the handcart as if the wheel
had rolled over a clod and picked it up, the other
was on the left leg as if the leg had been put down
on a similar clod which had stuck in the same way.</p>

<p>It was, of course, evident that the handcart had
been not only wheeled over a place where there was
yellow clay, but had been set down there. At first
French saw nothing remarkable in this, but now it
occurred to him that he had not noticed any clay
of the colour in the neighbourhood. Where then
had the pieces been picked up?</p>

<p>He had seen similar clay on the previous night,
but not close by. The heap of stuff removed in
opening the grave down in Thirsby was just that
kind of material. He had noticed it particularly in
the light of the acetylene lamp. It was of a
characteristic light yellow and very stiff and compact
like puddle. But he had seen nothing like it up on
the moor. The soil all about was dark coloured,
almost peaty.</p>

<p>He cast his thoughts back to that scene in the
graveyard and then he recalled another point. He
had looked down into the grave when the coffin was
being raised, and he now remembered that the sides
of the opening had shown black soil over the clay.
A layer of some three feet six or four feet of dark,
peaty soil had covered the yellow. French whistled
softly as the possible inference struck him.</p>

<p>A worn but still serviceable looking spade stood
in the corner of the shed. French picked it up, and
going a few yards out on to the moor, began to dig.
He was not particularly expert, and before he had
worked for many minutes he was in bath of
perspiration. But he persevered and the hole grew
until at a depth of nearly three feet he found what
he wanted. The spade brought up a piece of hard,
compact clay of a light yellow colour.</p>

<p>French had grown keenly interested as he filled
in the hole and removed the traces of his work.
With a feeling of suppressed excitement he returned
to the shed and carefully packed the half-moon
shaped cake of clay in a matchbox. Then locking
the door, he went out again on the moor and stood
looking round him as he pondered the facts he had
just learned.</p>

<p>The handcart had been recently set down in and
wheeled across a patch of yellow clay. This almost
certainly had been done on the last occasion it had
been used, otherwise the clay would have been
knocked off on subsequent journeys. For the same
reason the place must have been close to Starvel.
There was no exposed clay near Starvel, but it was
to be found at a depth of some three feet below
ground level.</p>

<p>From this it surely followed that some one had
dug a hole near Starvel and wheeled the handcart
to the edge before it was filled in.</p>

<p>French went a step farther. If he was correct
that the body of Markham Giles had been brought
to Starvel on that tragic night it was almost certain
that the handcart had been used, as there was no
other way, so far as he could see, in which the
terrible burden could have been carried. But so long
a journey would have knocked the clay off the wheel;
therefore the journey to the hole had been made
<em>after</em> that with the body. Further, the handcart
could scarcely have been used since the fire: the
tragedy was then over and the surviving actor had
left the district.</p>

<p>Did these considerations not suggest that Roper,
having brought the man’s body to Starvel, had
loaded up his booty on the handcart—possibly there
were old silver or valuable ornaments as well as
the bank notes—wheeled it out on the moor and
buried it so as to hide it safely until he could come
back and remove it?</p>

<p>French recalled his reasons for thinking that the
booty might have been so hidden. All those
notes—assuming there was nothing else—would have had a
certain bulk. Probably a suitcase would have been
necessary to carry them. A man with a suitcase
is a more noticeable figure than one without. Would
it not have been wise for a criminal fleeing from
justice to hide the stuff, provided he could find a
safe place in which to do so? Moreover—and this
was the strongest point—had Roper been arrested
without the notes nothing could have been proved
against him. He could say he had escaped from
the fire by the merest piece of good fortune or he
could simulate loss of memory from the shock. Or
again he could explain that he had feared to come
forward lest he should be suspected. No matter
what might have been thought, he was safe. But
let him be found with the notes in his possession
and he was as good as hanged.</p>

<p>French, looking round him there in the centre of
the great Hollow, felt his spirits rising as he
wondered if he were about to make the greatest <i lang="fr">coup</i>
of the whole case.</p>

<p>His question now was: Where would Roper make
his cache? Not near the road where the disturbed
earth would be visible to a chance passerby. Not
near the house in case some of the crowds attracted
by the fire should make an unexpected find. But
not too far away from either lest he himself might
have difficulty in locating the place.</p>

<p>French began to walk round the house in circles
of ever increasing radius, scrutinising the ground
for traces of yellow clay. And so he searched until
the evening began to draw in and dusk approached.</p>

<p>And then, as he was coming to the conclusion that
it was getting too dark to carry on, he found what
he wanted. Out on the open moor at the back of
the house and at the bottom of a tiny hollow were
unmistakable traces of recent digging. The ground
over a few square feet was marked with scraps of
disintegrating yellow clay and the sods with which
the hole was covered still showed cut edges.</p>

<p>French was overwhelmed with delight. That he
had found something of value, most probably a
cache containing the stolen money, he had no doubt.
Scarcely could he restrain his desire to open the hole
again then and there. But it was getting dark and
he had no lamp. He thought two witnesses would
be desirable, so he curbed his impatience, noted
carefully the position of the marks, and regretting the
necessity for leaving it unguarded, set off on his
return journey.</p>

<p>He called to see Sergeant Kent and arranged that
he and a constable should meet him at the outhouse
at eight o’clock on the following morning. At the
hotel he dined, and saying that he had to take the
night train to Carlisle, asked for a packet of
sandwiches. Then he left the town and walked out once
more to Starvel.</p>

<p>His mind was not at rest until he had again visited
the site of the hole and made sure it remained
undisturbed. Then, determined to take no chances,
he re-entered the outhouse, and seating himself at
a window from which he could see the hollow in the
light of the moon, lit his pipe and composed himself
to watch.</p>

</div>

<div class="chapter" id="ch14">

<h2>CHAPTER FOURTEEN: The Secret of the Moor</h2>

<p>That night in the lonely shed beside the gaunt,
blackened walls of the old house, proved one of the
longest French had ever spent. But there was no
escape from the vigil. If Averill’s hoard lay
beneath the sods a few yards away, the place must be
watched. Roper might come for the swag at any
time and French could not run the risk of its being
snatched at the last moment from his own eager
clutches.</p>

<p>He pulled a couple of old boxes to the window,
and sitting down, made himself as comfortable as he
could. But time dragged leadenly. He watched
while the moon crept slowly across the sky, he
speculated over the tragic business on which he was
engaged and indulged in waking dreams of the time
when he should be Chief Inspector French of the
C.I.D., but nothing that he could do seemed to
shorten the endless hours. He was cold, too, in spite
of his heavy coat. He longed to go out and warm
himself by a brisk walk, but he dared not risk
betraying his presence. In the small hours he ate
his sandwiches, and then he had to fight an
overwhelming desire for sleep, intensified by the fact
that he had been up a good part of the previous
night. But his vigilance was unrewarded. There
was no sign of a marauder, and as the first faint
glow of dawn began to show in the east, he saw that
he had had all his trouble for nothing. Altogether
he was not sorry when just before eight o’clock
Sergeant Kent and the constable put in an
appearance, and as he stepped out to meet them he heaved
a sigh of heartfelt relief.</p>

<p>“You’re here before us,” Kent greeted him in
surprise.</p>

<p>“That’s right, but I was too early. Now,
sergeant, I asked you to come out here for rather an
unusual purpose: in fact, so that we might dig a
hole. Here is a spade and we’ll go and begin at
once.”</p>

<p>The sergeant looked as if he wondered whether
French hadn’t gone off his head, but he controlled
his feelings and with his satellite followed the
other’s lead.</p>

<p>“I want you,” went on French when they had
reached the site of his discovery, “to see just why
I wish to dig this hole at this place,” and he showed
him the traces of the yellow clay and the cut sods.
“You see, some one has buried something here, and
I want to find out what it is.”</p>

<p>Kent in a non-committal silence seized the spade
and began digging. The constable then tried his
hand, and when he had had enough, French relieved
him. So they took it in turns while the hole deepened
and the heap of soil beside it grew.</p>

<p>Suddenly the spade encountered something soft
and yielding which yet resisted its pressure. Kent,
who was using it, stopped digging and began to clear
away the surrounding soil, while the others watched,
French breathlessly, the constable with the bovine
impassiveness which he had exhibited throughout.</p>

<p>“It’s a blanket, this is,” the sergeant announced
presently. “Something rolled up in a blanket.”</p>

<p>“Go on,” said French. “Open it up.”</p>

<p>Kent resumed his digging. For some minutes he
worked, and then he straightened himself and looked
at French wonderingly.</p>

<p>“Lord save us!” he exclaimed in awed tones.
“It’s uncommon like a human corpse.”</p>

<p>“Nonsense!” French answered sharply. “It
couldn’t be anything of the kind. Get on and open it
and then you’ll know.”</p>

<p>The sergeant hesitated, then climbed heavily out
of the hole.</p>

<p>“Well, look yourself, sir,” he invited.</p>

<p>French jumped down, and as he gazed on the
outline of the blanket covered object, his eyes grew
round and something like consternation filled his
mind. The sergeant was right! There was no
mistaking that shape! This was a grave that they were
opening and the blanket was a shroud.</p>

<p>French swore, then controlled himself and turned
to the sergeant.</p>

<p>“You’re right, Kent. It’s a body sure enough.
Clear away the soil round it while the constable and
I get that shed door off its hinges.”</p>

<p>The task of raising the uncoffined and decaying
remains on to the improvised stretcher was one
which French could never afterwards think of
without a qualm of sick loathing, but eventually it was
done and the men slowly carried the shrouded
horror to the shed. There the door was placed
upon a couple of boxes and French, clenching his
teeth, turned back the blanket from the face.</p>

<p>In spite of the terrible ravages of time both Kent
and the constable immediately recognised the
distorted features. The body was that of Markham
Giles!</p>

<p>The discovery left French almost speechless. If
Markham Giles’ body was here, <em>whose was the third
body at Starvel?</em> Was the whole of his case
tumbling about his ears? Once again he swore bitterly
and once again pulled himself together to deal with
the next step.</p>

<p>“This means an inquest,” he said to Kent. “You
and I had better get back to Thirsby and notify the
coroner and so forth, and this man of yours can stay
here and keep watch.”</p>

<p>They walked down to the little town almost in
silence, French too full of his new problem to indulge
in conversation, and the sergeant not liking to break
in upon his companion’s thoughts. On arrival Kent
got in touch with the coroner while French rang up
Major Valentine.</p>

<p>“No, sir, I don’t know what to make of it,” he
admitted in answer to the major’s sharp question.
“It certainly does look as if the man I suspected was
dead after all. But I would rather not discuss it
over the ’phone. Could I see you, sir, if I went
down to Leeds?”</p>

<p>“No, I’ll go to Thirsby. I’d like to look into the
matter on the spot. There will be an inquest, of
course?”</p>

<p>“Yes, sir. Sergeant Kent is arranging it with the
coroner. We shall want an autopsy also. One of
the things I wanted to know is who you think I
should have to make it. But you can tell me that
when you come.”</p>

<p>Major Valentine replied that he would drive over
in his car and would pick up French at the police
station at two p.m. on his way out to Starvel.</p>

<p>It was now getting on towards midday, but French
decided that he would have time to make an
inquiry and get lunch before the Chief Constable’s
arrival. He therefore turned into High Street
and walked to Pullar’s, the largest shoe shop of the
town.</p>

<p>“Mr. Pullar in?” he asked pleasantly. He had
met the man in the bar of the Thirsdale Arms and
there was a nodding acquaintance between the two.</p>

<p>“I suppose you haven’t heard of our discovery,
Mr. Pullar?” French began when he was seated in
the proprietor’s office. The whole business was
bound to come out at the inquest, so he might as well
enlist the other’s goodwill by telling him
confidentially something about it.</p>

<p>Mr. Pullar cautiously admitted he hadn’t heard
anything unusual.</p>

<p>“This is unusual enough for any one,” French
assured him, and he told of the finding of the grave on
the moor, though making no mention of his doubts
and fears about Roper.</p>

<p>Mr. Pullar was duly impressed and repeatedly
begged that his soul might be blessed. When he had
absorbed the news French turned to the real object
of his call.</p>

<p>“I thought that maybe you could give me a bit of
help, Mr. Pullar. You’d perhaps be interested to
know how I got on to the thing. Well, it was in
this way.” He took from the matchbox the piece
of clay he had found on the floor of the shed.</p>

<p>“I picked this up in the shed, and as that sort of
clay is covered everywhere here with three feet of
dark soil, it followed that some one had dug a hole
more than three feet deep.”</p>

<p>Mr. Pullar expressed his admiration of the other’s
perspicacity with the same pious wish as before.</p>

<p>“Now you see,” French continued, “this clay was
sticking to a shoe. It probably got a bit dry in the
shed and dropped or got knocked off. Now, Mr.
Pullar, can you tell me what kind of a shoe it was?”</p>

<p>Mr. Pullar shook his head. With every wish to
assist, he was doubtful if he could answer the
question. He picked up the piece of clay and turned it
over gingerly in his fingers.</p>

<p>“Well,” he said presently, pointing to the hollow
curve, “that’s been sticking round the outside of a
heel, that has. If it had been a toe it would have
been squeezed flatter. But that’s the square-edged
mark of a heel.” He looked interrogatively at
French, who hastened to interject: “Just what I
thought, Mr. Pullar. A man’s heel.”</p>

<p>“Yes, a man’s heel I would think: though, mind
you, it’s not easy to tell the difference between a
man’s and some of these flat heeled shoes women
wear now.”</p>

<p>“I thought it was a man’s from the size.”</p>

<p>“No: it might be either a big woman or a small
man. Sevens, I should say.” He got up and put his
head through the office door. “Here, John! Bring
me three pairs of gents’ black Fitwells: a six and a
half, a seven and an eight: medium weight.”</p>

<p>When the shoes came Mr. Pullar attempted to fit
the circle of clay to the curve of each heel. French
was delighted with the thorough and systematic way
he set about it. He tried with all three sizes, then
roared out for a pair of sixes and a pair of nines.</p>

<p>“It’s no good, Mr. French,” he said when he had
tested these also. “Look for yourself. It’s smaller
than a nine, but you can’t tell any more than that.
It might be a six or a seven or an eight. It isn’t
sharp enough to say.”</p>

<p>French looked for himself, but he had to admit
the other’s conclusion was correct. The prints
presumably had been made by a man with rather small
feet, and that was all that could be said.</p>

<p>French was disappointed. He had hoped for
something more definite. Roper admittedly had
rather small feet, but the same was true of numbers
of other men.</p>

<p>He bade Mr. Pullar good day and returned to the
hotel for lunch. But he soon learned that the worthy
shoe merchant had made the most of his
opportunities. Scarcely had he sat down when the
reporter of the local paper hurried into the coffee
room and excitedly demanded details of the great
find. And behind him appeared the hotel proprietor
and a number of clients who had been supporting
British industries in the bar.</p>

<p>French saw there was nothing for it but
capitulation. Good-humouredly he told his story, merely
stipulating that after his statement to the reporter
he should not be troubled further until he had
finished his lunch. This was agreed to, but it is sad to
relate that French did not entirely play the game.
His repast ended, he slipped out through the yard,
and by devious ways reached the police station
unnoticed. Major Valentine drove up as he arrived
and in a few seconds the two men were whirling out
along the Starvel road, while French told his story
in detail.</p>

<p>“It’s really an extraordinary development,” the
Chief Constable commented. “You assumed that
Giles had been murdered in order to obtain his body
for the Starvel fraud. If you were correct it
followed that his coffin would be empty. You opened
his coffin and it was empty. A more complete
vindication of your line of reasoning it would be hard
to imagine. And now it turns out that the body was
not used for the Starvel fraud; therefore the whole
of your reasoning falls to the ground. If you had
not made a mistake and acted on false premises you
would not have discovered the truth. Peculiar,
isn’t it?”</p>

<p>“Peculiar enough, sir. But I wish I could agree
with you that I had discovered the truth. It seems
to me I am further away from it than ever.”</p>

<p>“No; the correction of an error is always
progress. But I’m not denying,” Major Valentine went
on with a whimsical smile, “that there is still
something left to be cleared up.”</p>

<p>French laughed unhappily.</p>

<p>“I don’t like to think of it,” he said. “But the
post-mortem may tell us something. According to
my previous theory this man was murdered. Now
this discovery raises a certain doubt, though
personally I have very little. But in any case we have
no proof. Therefore I thought we should want a
post-mortem.”</p>

<p>“Undoubtedly. We’ll get Dr. Lingard of
Hellifield. This the shed?”</p>

<p>“Yes, sir. The body’s inside.”</p>

<p>A few minutes sufficed to put the chief constable in
possession of all the available information and the
two men returned to the car.</p>

<p>“You know,” the major declared as he restarted
his engine, “if this man was murdered it doesn’t say
a great deal for that Dr. Emerson. He gave a
certificate of death from natural causes, didn’t he?”</p>

<p>“If you ask my opinion,” French answered
gloomily, “he didn’t examine the body at all. I saw him
about it. It seems the man had been suffering from
heart disease for years. He also had a touch of
influenza some days before his death which might
have caused heart failure. Dr. Emerson practically
admitted he had assumed this had happened. He
also admitted that anyhow only a post-mortem could
have made sure.”</p>

<p>“Careless and reprehensible, no doubt. But,
French, I wonder whether we shouldn’t all have
done the same in his circumstances. The idea of
foul play in such a case would never enter any one’s
head.”</p>

<p>“That’s what he said, sir. Until I told him about
the empty coffin he scouted the suggestion. When I
mentioned that he didn’t know what to say.”</p>

<p>“He’ll be required at the inquest?”</p>

<p>“Of course, sir. And the other doctor, Philpot.
He attended the man during his illness.”</p>

<p>They ran rapidly into the town and pulled up at
the police station. Kent, recognising his visitor,
hurried obsequiously to meet them.</p>

<p>“Good-evening, Kent,” the major greeted him.
“Inspector French has just been telling me of this
affair. Have you heard from the coroner?”</p>

<p>“Yes, sir, I saw him about it. To-morrow at
eleven he’s fixed for the inquest.”</p>

<p>“Where?”</p>

<p>“At the courthouse. He asked that the remains
might be brought in before that.”</p>

<p>“It’s not allowing much time for the post-mortem.
Better see the coroner again, Kent, and get him to
take evidence of identification and adjourn for a
week. I’ll arrange with Dr. Lingard about the
post-mortem at once, and will you, French, get in
touch with the local doctors. Meanwhile as we’re
here let us settle about the evidence.”</p>

<p>Kent led the way to his room and there a
discussion took place on the procedure to be adopted at the
inquest. A list of the witnesses was drawn up with
a note of the testimony which was to be expected
from each. Certain facts, it was considered, should
be kept in the background, and Kent was instructed
to see the coroner and ask him to arrange this also.
When the business was complete the major rose.</p>

<p>“Then I shall see you at the adjourned inquest,
Kent. French, if you’ll come along I’ll give you
a lift as far as your hotel. As a matter of fact I’d
like to have a chat with you,” he went on when they
had left the police station. “This new development
is certainly very puzzling and I’d like to discuss it
in detail. Have you a private sitting room?”</p>

<p>“Not all the time. I’ve had one once or twice
for an evening when I had work to do, but ordinary
times I don’t have it. We can get it all right now
though.”</p>

<p>“Well, you arrange it while I see to the car. And
order some tea. You’ll join me in a cup, won’t
you?”</p>

<p>“Thank you, I should like to.”</p>

<p>In a few minutes a fire of logs was crackling in the
rather dismal private sitting room of the Thirsdale
Arms. Until tea was over the major chatted of
men and things apart from the case, but when the
waiter had disappeared with the tray and the two
men had settled themselves with cigars before the
fire he came to business.</p>

<p>“I admit, French, that I am not only
tremendously interested in this case, but also extremely
puzzled. From what you say, that’s your position
also. Now just to run over two or three points. I
take it there is no doubt as to motive?”</p>

<p>“No, sir, we may take it as gospel that Mr.
Averill’s thirty thousand pounds were stolen and that
that’s the key of the whole affair.”</p>

<p>“You suspected Whymper at first?”</p>

<p>“Yes, at first sight things looked bad for him. I
needn’t go over the details: he had some of the
stolen money in his possession and had been to the
house on the night of the tragedy and so on. But
I went into the thing thoroughly and I was satisfied
that Roper had made him his dupe. Whymper’s
all right, sir. We shall get nothing there.”</p>

<p>“I hear he and Miss Averill are to be married.”</p>

<p>“So I heard, in fact he told me himself. He
wanted to propose and then this affair made him
hold back. But as soon as I told him I was not
going to arrest him he went straight to the lady
and told her the circumstances and asked her to
marry him. She accepted him and the wedding is
to take place soon.”</p>

<p>“I know his father in Leeds and I’m glad to hear
that he’s definitely out of trouble. Then you
suspected Philpot?”</p>

<p>“I suspected Philpot because of his connection
with Roper, though there was nothing directly
connecting him with the Starvel crime. But I soon saw
that I was on the wrong track there too. He
accounted for everything that seemed suspicious, and
what was more, any points of his statement which in
the nature of the case could be corroborated, were
corroborated by other witnesses. Besides, he was
ill at the time: there was the evidence of his
housekeeper and others as well as Dr. Emerson’s
testimony that he was unable to leave his bed. And
there was his failure. If he had just obtained
£30,000 he wouldn’t have allowed the bailiff in.”</p>

<p>“Might not that have been a trick to put people
off the scent?”</p>

<p>“No, sir, I don’t think so. If he had been guilty
he wouldn’t have shown sudden evidence of wealth,
but he wouldn’t have gone bankrupt either—just
for fear it might be taken as a trick. Of course,
sir, I’m aware that none of this is absolutely
conclusive. There was absence of evidence of guilt, but
not proof of innocence, and, of course, illness can
be faked and so on. But the thing that really
cleared Philpot in my mind was the conduct of
Roper. It’s impossible to consider this case
without considering Roper’s conduct.”</p>

<p>“I know, and I really agree with you. Still let us
exhaust the possibilities. You thought of other
people, I suppose?”</p>

<p>“I thought of every one else in the place almost.
Oxley, Tarkington, Emerson and several others;
even Kent I considered. But there wasn’t a shred
of evidence against any of them. The only other
real alternative to Roper is the burglars—the gang
who have been operating for some months past. But
here again Roper’s conduct comes in. If Roper
wasn’t guilty he wouldn’t have acted as he did.”</p>

<p>The chief constable smoked in silence for some
moments.</p>

<p>“I think all you say is very sound. Now just
run over the case against Roper and I shall try to
pick holes.”</p>

<p>“First, sir, there was the man’s character;
vindictive, unscrupulous, a blackmailer, and as well as that
a skilful forger. Admittedly this description came
from Philpot, but all that could be known to
outsiders was confirmed by the sergeant and many
others at Kintilloch. Roper was the only person
we know of, other than the burglar gang, who had
the character and the ability to commit the crime.”</p>

<p>“Not convincing, but go on.”</p>

<p>“Not convincing alone, no doubt; but it does not
stand alone. Secondly, there was the getting of
Miss Averill out of the way; thirdly, there was the
Whymper episode and fourthly, the matter of
Giles’s funeral.”</p>

<p>“That’s all right except that when we find Giles’s
body was not burned the whole case falls to the
ground.”</p>

<p>French threw the stub of his cigar into the fire.</p>

<p>“Don’t you believe it, sir. None of what I have
been saying falls to the ground. Though I admit
the motive of this Giles business is not clear, the
facts remain and their significance remains. I don’t
now follow all Roper’s scheme, but I still believe
he is our man.”</p>

<p>Major Valentine nodded decisively.</p>

<p>“So do I, French, and we shall get him all right.
Then you’ve no theory of where the third body
came from?”</p>

<p>“I believe Roper enticed some other poor devil
to the house and murdered him also. I think, sir,
we’ll have to try again to find out if any one
disappeared about that time.”</p>

<p>“I’ll see to it, but I’m not hopeful of doing better
than before.”</p>

<p>Major Valentine showed signs of breaking up
the conference, but French raised his hand.</p>

<p>“A moment, sir, if you please. I was thinking
that this inquest gives us a chance that perhaps we
should take advantage of. No more of those notes
have come through. What, sir, would you say was
the reason for that?”</p>

<p>“Well, if we’re right about Roper being alive, I
suppose because he’s afraid.”</p>

<p>“That’s what I think. And this business will
make him still more afraid. Now I wonder if we
couldn’t set his mind at ease for him.”</p>

<p>“I don’t quite follow.”</p>

<p>“Why, this way. Suppose that I was very frank
in my evidence—very frank and open and comprehensive.
Suppose that I should tell about the notes;
about their numbers having been taken, and about
the one turning up in London, and robbery being
thereby suspected and my being sent down to
investigate. Suppose I explained that I had succeeded in
tracing that note and had found that it had been
given by Mr. Averill himself to a friend, and that
the whole transaction was perfectly in order. But
suppose I conveyed that only the numbers of the
last batch of notes—say, twenty twenties—were
known. Wouldn’t that do the trick?”</p>

<p>“You mean that if the numbers of only twenty
notes were known, Roper would feel safe in
changing the others?”</p>

<p>“Quite so. Furthermore, if nothing was said
about the ashes being newspaper he would think that
the suspicion of robbery had been dispelled by the
discovery that the note passed in London was all
right.”</p>

<p>“It’s worth trying. If he rises to it you’ll get
him.”</p>

<p>“Right, sir. Then I’ll advise the coroner
beforehand. Or perhaps you would do so?”</p>

<p>“I’ll do it. Well, I must be getting home. I’m
glad to have had this talk and I hope your scheme
will meet with success.”</p>

<p>Next morning the inquest opened and formal
evidence of identification of the remains of the late
Markham Giles was taken. The proceedings were
then adjourned for seven days to enable the police
to prosecute inquiries.</p>

</div>

<div class="chapter" id="ch15">

<h2>CHAPTER FIFTEEN: French Baits His Trap</h2>

<p>That day week was a red letter day in the
history of Thirsby. The story of French’s discoveries,
by this time common property, had created an
absolute furore in the little town. Never had such a
series of tragedies and thrills disturbed its placid
existence. Never had interest risen to such fever
heat. It was therefore not surprising that every
available seat in the courthouse was occupied long
before the hour of the adjourned inquest, and that
a queue of eager, pushing people, unable to gain
admittance, stretched away in a long column from its
door. But the police had seen to it that all who
were particularly interested in the tragedy had
obtained places. In the row usually reserved for
barristers sat Oxley with Ruth Averill, who had
been summoned to attend as a witness, and Mrs.
Oxley, who looked on the girl as her charge and
insisted on accompanying her. Whymper, now an
accepted lover, sat next Ruth, and behind were
Tarkington, Bloxham, Emerson, Philpot and the
police doctor, Lingard. Major Valentine and
French were together in the seat usually occupied
by the clerk of the Crown, while Kent, looking
harassed and anxious, was standing in the body of the
court, fumbling with a sheaf of papers and
whispering to his subordinates.</p>

<p>The coroner was that same Dr. Lonsdale who had
acted in a similar capacity some nine weeks earlier
when the inquiry into the death of the three victims
of the Starvel fire had taken place. He also seemed
worried, as if he feared the elucidation of these
mysterious happenings might try his powers beyond
their capacity.</p>

<p>The preliminaries having been gone through
already, the coroner began to take evidence
immediately, and Dr. Emerson was called.</p>

<p>“You attended the late Mr. Markham Giles?”
the coroner asked when he had obtained the other’s
name and qualifications.</p>

<p>“I attended him up to five years ago, when Dr.
Philpot took the case over. Owing to Dr. Philpot’s
being ill at the time of his death I was again called
in.”</p>

<p>“For what complaint did you formerly attend
the deceased?”</p>

<p>“Myocarditis. It was a disease of some years’
standing.”</p>

<p>“Myocarditis is heart disease, isn’t it? Was the
deceased badly affected?”</p>

<p>“Five years ago, fairly badly. I have no doubt
that at the time of his death he was much worse,
as the disease is incurable and progressive.”</p>

<p>“We can no doubt get that from Dr. Philpot.
When did you hear of Mr. Giles’s death, Dr.
Emerson?”</p>

<p>“On Wednesday morning, 15th September.”</p>

<p>“Who told you of it?”</p>

<p>“John Roper, the Starvel man-servant.”</p>

<p>“Did you go out to Starvel and examine the
body?”</p>

<p>“Yes, I did, after first consulting Dr. Philpot
on the case.”</p>

<p>“Oh, you saw Dr. Philpot. And what was the
result of your consultation?”</p>

<p>“Dr. Philpot told me that Mr. Giles had
developed influenza, and that he had seen him on
Thursday. He was very weak and Dr. Philpot did
not expect him to get over it.”</p>

<p>“Then you examined the body?”</p>

<p>“Yes, I went out to Starvel immediately.”</p>

<p>“And what opinion did you then form as to the
cause of death?”</p>

<p>“I believed it to be myocarditis.”</p>

<p>“And you gave a certificate to that effect?”</p>

<p>“I did.”</p>

<p>“Did you make any specific examination of the
remains on which you based your opinion?”</p>

<p>“Yes, so far as it was possible without a
post-mortem.”</p>

<p>“And you were quite satisfied that you had made
no mistake?”</p>

<p>“I was quite satisfied.”</p>

<p>“That will do in the meantime. Please do not
go away, Dr. Emerson, as I may have some further
questions to put to you later.”</p>

<p>Dr. Philpot was then called. He corroborated
the evidence of the last witness in so far as it
concerned himself. He had attended Mr. Giles during
the past five years. Deceased was suffering from
myocarditis, which had become worse and of which
he might have died at any moment. On the Thursday
prior to his death witness had been informed
by Roper, Mr. Averill’s man-servant, that deceased
seemed rather seriously ill, and he went out to see
him. Deceased was feeble and witness believed that
he was very near his end. Witness did not think
he could live more than three or four days. When
he heard of his death it was only what he had
expected.</p>

<p>Ruth Averill was the next witness. She was nervous,
but the sergeant was deferential to her and
the coroner fatherly and kind. Her evidence was
soon over. In answer to a number of questions she
deposed that she had known Mr. Giles fairly well
and had been to sit with him on different occasions
during his illness. On the Tuesday of that tragic
week she had left Starvel to pay a short visit to
York, and on her way into Thirsby she had called
to see him. He had seemed very weak and frail.
He could scarcely speak. Ruth had spent about ten
minutes with him and had then driven on to Thirsby.
She had never seen him again.</p>

<p>A number of persons were then called relative
to the funeral. The clerk from the Town Hall who
dealt with interments, the caretaker of the new
cemetery, the undertaker and such of his men as had
assisted, gave evidence in turn. The coroner was
extremely detailed in his questions, and when he had
finished the whole history of the sad affair stood
revealed, with the exception of one point.</p>

<p>This was Roper’s false statement to the undertaker
that the body required to be coffined without
delay. It had been decided that nothing must leak
out connecting the death of Giles with Starvel, and
it spoke volumes for the coroner’s skill that he was
able to obtain the other details of the interment
while keeping Roper’s duplicity secret.</p>

<p>From the united testimony given it seemed that
Markham Giles had died at some time during the
Tuesday night. Roper had stated to more than one
witness that Mrs. Roper had gone out to see him
about eight o’clock on that evening, when she found
him weak, but fairly easy and showing no sign of
any early collapse. About nine the next morning,
Wednesday, she went over again to find that the
man had been dead for some hours. Mr. Giles was
lying in the same position as he had occupied on
the previous evening, and from the peaceful expression
on his face it looked as if he had passed away
painlessly. Mrs. Roper had gone back for her
husband, who had returned with her to the cottage.
There they had done what they could, and Roper
had then gone into Thirsby and made arrangements
for the funeral. First he had reported the death
to Dr. Emerson. Then he had called at the Town
Hall and purchased a grave, going on to the new
cemetery to see the site. Lastly, he had visited
the undertaker, arranging the details of the
funeral.</p>

<p>The undertaker had known Mr. Giles, and later,
on that day, the Wednesday, he had sent out two
men with a coffin which he believed would be of the
right size. His estimate had proved correct and
the men had placed the remains in the coffin,
screwing down the lid and leaving all ready for the
funeral.</p>

<p>On the second day, the Friday, the interment took
place. The same men who had coffined the remains
lifted the coffin into the hearse, and they declared
that they saw no signs of the screws having been
tampered with or of the presence of any person in
the house during their absence. The funeral was
conducted in the customary manner, and when the
grave had been filled none of those who had been
present imagined that anything out of the common
had taken place. Roper had paid all the bills in
advance, saying that the deceased had had a
premonition of his death and had handed him the sum
of fifteen pounds to meet the expenses.</p>

<p>French was the next witness. The coroner had
been carefully primed as to his evidence also, and
asked only general questions.</p>

<p>“Now, Mr. French, you made some unexpected
discoveries about this matter?”</p>

<p>“I did, sir.”</p>

<p>“Will you please tell the jury in your own words
the nature of these discoveries and how you came
to make them.”</p>

<p>This was French’s opportunity. Speaking
respectfully and with an air of the utmost candour,
he told very nearly the truth. Deliberately he
slightly coloured the facts, coloured them with the
object and in the hope that somewhere Roper would
read what he had said—and be deceived into coming
into the open.</p>

<p>“I was sent here,” he explained, “on a matter
arising out of the fire at Starvel. I made certain
inquiries and received certain information. As to
the truth of the information I cannot of course bear
testimony, but I cannot explain the steps I took
unless I mention it. With the object of accounting
for my actions, sir, is it your wish that I do so?”</p>

<p>“If you please, Mr. French. We quite understand
that your actual evidence is confined to matters which
came under your own observation. That does not
prevent you introducing explanatory matter as to
how you got your results.”</p>

<p>“Very good, sir. According to my information
the following was the state of affairs which had
obtained prior to my being sent down here. The
late Mr. Averill had a sum of money amounting to
several thousand pounds stored in a safe in his
bedroom. This was given in evidence at the inquest
on the victims of the Starvel tragedy. It was not
then mentioned, but it was the fact—always
according to my information—that that money had
consisted largely of twenty-pound notes. Mr. Averill
was in the habit of sending to the bank the various
cheques, dividends and so forth by which he
received his income. By his instructions these were
cashed and the money was returned to Starvel in
the form of twenty-pound notes, which the old
gentleman placed with the others in his safe. All these
notes were believed to have been destroyed in the
fire. But it so happened that the numbers of the
last consignment—ten notes, for £200—were taken
by the bank teller before the notes were sent out
to Starvel, and these notes were reported to the
bank’s headquarters as being destroyed. When,
therefore, some three weeks after the tragedy one
of them turned up in London, questions were asked.
Reasons were given for believing that this particular
note had been in Mr. Averill’s safe at Starvel on
the night of the fire, so the suggestion at once arose
that the fire was not an accident, but a deliberate
attempt to hide a crime of murder and burglary.
I was sent down to investigate the affair, and I may
say that I found out who had passed the note and
satisfied myself beyond question that he had
received it in a legitimate manner, and that all his
actions were perfectly correct and in order. It
followed, therefore, that the finding of the note did not
in reality support any theory of crime such as had
been put forward.”</p>

<p>While French was speaking the proverbial pin
could have been heard, had any one tried the
experiment of dropping it in the courthouse. He had,
to put it mildly, the ear of his audience. Every one
listened, literally, with bated breath. Though it
was vaguely known that he was a detective working
on the Starvel case, the story that he himself had
circulated had been generally accepted; that he was
employed on behalf of certain insurance companies
to ascertain the cause of the outbreak. To find
that the pleasant-spoken, easygoing stranger whom
the townspeople had almost begun to accept as one
of themselves, was none other than a full-fledged
inspector from Scotland Yard, investigating what
had been at first suspected to be a triple murder of
an unusually terrible and sinister kind, was a
discovery so thrilling as completely to absorb the
attention of all.</p>

<p>“While engaged in clearing up the Starvel affair,”
French went on, “a hint was conveyed to me that I
was working on the wrong case: that if I wanted a
real mystery I should drop what I was at and turn
my attention to the death and burial, particularly
the burial, of Mr. Giles. With your permission,
sir, I do not feel at liberty to mention the source
from which this hint came. It was very vague, but
we men from the Yard are taught to pick up vague
hints. I thought over the matter for some days
before I guessed what might be meant. Could Mr.
Giles’s coffin have been used as a hiding place for
stolen goods? I knew, of course, of the many
burglaries which had taken place in the surrounding
country during the last six months. I knew also that
if burglars wished to hide their swag, no better place
could be devised than a coffin. There it would be
safe until the hue and cry had died down and from
there it could be recovered when desired. If this
theory were true, the gang of burglars would either
have heard of Mr. Giles’s death and used the
circumstances to their advantage, or they would have
arranged the circumstance by murdering him. In
either case they would have taken the remains from
the coffin, buried them somewhere close by, and
replaced them with the stolen articles.”</p>

<p>French paused and a wave of movement swept
over the crowded assembly as its members changed
their cramped positions. Seldom had the public had
such a treat and they were not going to miss any
of it. There was an instantaneous stiffening to
concentrated attention as French resumed:—</p>

<p>“After careful consideration I thought the matter
serious enough to warrant action. I therefore
obtained an order to open the grave, and there I found
that my suspicions were well founded. There was
no body in the coffin, but on the other hand there
was no swag. The coffin was half-full of earth.
But this did not of course invalidate the theory I
have outlined. It only meant that if that theory
were true we were late; that at some time within
the past nine weeks the burglars had visited the
churchyard and removed the stuff. This might or
might not have happened.”</p>

<p>Again French paused and this time the coroner
remarked quietly:—</p>

<p>“And then, Mr. French?”</p>

<p>“Then, sir, I returned to the gentleman’s cottage
and made a further investigation. Eventually I
found traces of yellow clay lying about. All the
soil in the district is dark, but at the grave I had
noticed that a layer of dark soil covered a bed of
similar yellow clay. So I dug a hole and found, as
I expected, that this bed of clay extended under the
moor also. It therefore seemed certain that some
one had dug a hole in the vicinity, and on searching
the moor I found the place. I took Sergeant Kent
and a constable out, and the three of us re-opened
the hole and found the body just as these
gentlemen”—indicating the jury with a gesture—“have seen it.”</p>

<p>The police made no attempt to subdue the buzz
of repressed though excited conversation which
arose as French ceased speaking. The coroner was
still laboriously writing down French’s statement,
but he soon laid his pen down and spoke.</p>

<p>“You have made such a complete statement, Mr.
French, that I have but little to ask you. There
are just one or two small points upon which I should
like further information,” and he went on to put
his questions.</p>

<p>The coroner was a clever man and he played up
well to the request of the police. To the public he
continued to give the impression of a careful,
painstaking official, laboriously trying to obtain all the
facts in a difficult and complicated matter; in reality
his questions were futile in every respect except that
they directed attention away from the features of
the case which the authorities wished kept secret.
The result was that when he had finished and asked
if any one else desired to put a question, all were
convinced that there was no more to be learnt and
embarrassing topics were avoided.</p>

<p>“Dr. Reginald Lingard!”</p>

<p>The tall, thin, ascetic looking man seated beside
Philpot rose and went into the box. He deposed
that he practised at Hellifield and was the police
surgeon for the district.</p>

<p>“Now, Dr. Lingard,” began the coroner, “at the
request of the authorities did you make a
post-mortem examination of the remains of the late Mr.
Markham Giles, upon which this inquest is being
held?”</p>

<p>“That is so.”</p>

<p>“And did you ascertain the cause of death?”</p>

<p>“I did.”</p>

<p>“Will you tell the jury what that was.”</p>

<p>“The man died from shock following a large
injection of cocaine.”</p>

<p>“But an injection of cocaine is surely not fatal?”</p>

<p>“Not under ordinary circumstances. But to a
person suffering from myocarditis a large injection
is inevitably so.”</p>

<p>Though the evidence of French ought to have
prepared every one for such a <i lang="fr">dénouement</i>, there
was a gasp of surprise at this cold, precise
statement. It was only a few minutes since Dr. Emerson
had been heard to testify that he had given a
certificate of death from heart disease without mention
of cocaine, and that he had no doubt as to the
correctness of his diagnosis. What, every one
wondered, would Emerson say to this?</p>

<p>“I suppose, doctor, you have no doubt as to your
conclusion?”</p>

<p>“None whatever.”</p>

<p>“Could this cocaine have been self administered?”</p>

<p>“Undoubtedly it could.”</p>

<p>“With what object?”</p>

<p>Dr. Lingard gave a slight shrug.</p>

<p>“It is universal knowledge that many persons are
addicted to the drug. They take it because of its
enjoyable temporary effects. It might have been
taken with that motive in this instance, or it might
have been taken with the knowledge that it would
cause death.”</p>

<p>“You mean that Mr. Giles might have committed
suicide?”</p>

<p>“From the medical point of view, yes.”</p>

<p>“Might it also have been administered by some
other person?”</p>

<p>“Unquestionably.”</p>

<p>“With what object, Dr. Lingard?”</p>

<p>“It is not easy to say. Possibly in ignorance or
through error or with a mistaken desire to give the
patient ease, or possibly with the object of causing
his death.”</p>

<p>“You mean that the action might have been wilful
murder?”</p>

<p>“Yes, that is what I mean.”</p>

<p>Again a movement ran through the tense
audience. The coroner frowned and paused for a
moment, then resumed:—</p>

<p>“Do you know of any legitimate object—any
legitimate object whatever—for which the cocaine
might have been administered? Could it, for
example, have been intended as a medicine or
restorative?”</p>

<p>“I do not think so. In my opinion the drug could
only have been administered in error, or with intent
to kill.”</p>

<p>“Do you consider that the deadly nature of
cocaine is known to the public? I mean, is that
knowledge not confined to those with some medical
training?”</p>

<p>“I think the danger to a weak or diseased heart
is pretty generally known. Most people are aware
that deaths have occurred by its use, for example,
by dentists, and that for this reason it is now
seldom employed as an anesthetic.”</p>

<p>The coroner slowly blotted his manuscript.</p>

<p>“Now, Dr. Lingard, injections are administered
with a hypodermic syringe, are they not?”</p>

<p>“That is so.”</p>

<p>“Is there any other way in which they can be
given?”</p>

<p>“No.”</p>

<p>“Was such a syringe found in the present
instance?”</p>

<p>Dr. Lingard did not know. He had examined
the body only, not the house in which the death had
occurred. The coroner turned to another point.</p>

<p>“Did the body show any sign of the injection
having been forcibly administered?”</p>

<p>“No, but force sufficient to leave traces would
not have been necessary.”</p>

<p>“Would death from this cause leave traces other
than those ascertainable from a post-mortem?”</p>

<p>Dr. Lingard hesitated very slightly.</p>

<p>“I do not think so,” he answered. “If it did
they would be very faint and it would be easy to
overlook them.”</p>

<p>“Was Dr. Emerson at the post-mortem?”</p>

<p>“He was.”</p>

<p>“Have you anything else to tell us, anything
which you think might throw further light on this
extraordinary affair?”</p>

<p>No, Dr. Lingard had nothing, and Dr. Emerson
was recalled. He declared emphatically that he
had never had any suspicion that the deceased might
have been addicted to the cocaine habit.</p>

<p>“You have heard the evidence the previous
witness gave as to the cause of the deceased’s death.
Do you from your present knowledge agree with
his conclusions?”</p>

<p>“Completely,” Dr. Emerson answered. The man
looked harassed and careworn, but his bearing
remained dignified.</p>

<p>“Then how do you account for your certificate
that death occurred from natural causes?”</p>

<p>Dr. Emerson made a gesture of helplessness.</p>

<p>“How can I account for it except in the one way?”
he replied. “I was misled by the facts. I admit
being in error, but I do not think that under the
circumstances any doctor in the world would have
acted otherwise than as I did.”</p>

<p>“Now, Dr. Emerson,” the coroner leaned
forward and looked keenly at his witness, “tell me this.
Did you really examine the body at all after death?”</p>

<p>“I certainly examined it. And I examined it with
reasonable care, and neither then nor at any time
since until I heard of this extraordinary
development had I the slightest doubt that my certificate
was incorrect.” He paused, then, as the coroner
did not speak, went on again. “You will admit that
under the circumstances the idea of murder was the
last that would occur to any one. Five days earlier
Dr. Philpot had seen the man: he was then at the
point of death. He told me he expected to hear
of his death at any moment. When I heard of it
I went out and examined the body. It had all the
appearance of death from myocarditis. Only a
post-mortem could have told the difference: only a
post-mortem did tell the difference. As you know a
post-mortem is seldom held unless there is suspicion
of foul play. In this case there was none. I deeply
regret that I was misled, but I believe in all honesty
that there is no one who would not have acted as I
did under similar circumstances.”</p>

<p>The coroner bowed and turned to the jury.</p>

<p>“As Dr. Emerson has spoken so fully and frankly
on this matter, I do not think that I am called
upon to refer to it further. He no doubt realises
how regrettable it was, for if suspicion had been
aroused at the time instead of nine weeks later it
might have made all the difference in capturing the
criminal. In saying this I am not suggesting that
blame attaches to him. Would any one like to ask
Dr. Emerson any further question before he stands
down?”</p>

<p>No one responded to the invitation, and Dr.
Philpot was recalled. He deposed that he had never
seen any indications of the cocaine habit about
deceased, and he did not believe that considering the
state of his heart he could have used it.</p>

<p>Sergeant Kent was then sworn. He said that on
learning the result of the post-mortem he had
proceeded to the deceased’s cottage and had there made
a detailed search for cocaine or a hypodermic
syringe, but without finding traces of either. The
undertaker’s men, recalled, also declared that they
had seen nothing of the kind while attending to the
body.</p>

<p>There being no further witnesses the coroner
made a short businesslike statement summing up the
evidence. As to the cause of death, he said, there
could be no doubt. The medical evidence was
complete and undisputed. Deceased had died as the
result of an injection of cocaine, which his diseased
heart was unable to stand. That injection might
or might not have been self-administered. The
evidence of both doctors was that in their opinion
the deceased was not a victim of the cocaine habit,
and it was for the jury to consider the probability
of his having used it in this instance. He would
direct their attention to another point. Had the
fatal dose been self-administered, the syringe must
have remained on or beside the bed. It had not
been found. Who then had removed it and why?
On the other hand if the jury considered the dose
had been given by some other person or persons,
they must consider with what motive this had been
done. If they believed a genuine error had been
made they would return a verdict of death from
misadventure, but if upon weighing all the
circumstances they rejected the possibility of error they
would return a verdict of wilful murder.</p>

<p>For nearly an hour the jury deliberated, and then
they brought in the expected verdict of wilful
murder against some person or persons unknown.</p>

<p>“You did that quite well,” Major Valentine
assured French as the two men walked to the former’s
car after the inquiry. “If Roper is alive and reads
your evidence—and he is certain to do that if he is
in the country—he will think he is safe and may
start changing the notes. By the way, are you sure
that Tarkington and that clerk of his won’t give
you away about the numbers of the notes? Your
evidence must have sounded peculiar to them.”</p>

<p>“I thought of that,” French answered, “and I
saw them both and warned them. They’ll hold their
tongues.”</p>

<p>“I suppose no one has been trying to get just
that information out of them?”</p>

<p>“No, sir. I asked them that first thing, but no
one had.”</p>

<p>Before Major Valentine left he discussed with
French the steps that he would take to try to find
out whether any one had disappeared at the time
of the fire. The inquiry had already been made,
but this time it was to be pressed much more
energetically. At the same time the watch for the stolen
notes was to be redoubled, and French undertook
to arrange that a general memorandum on the
subject would be sent to all the banks in the country.</p>

<p>A third line of research was suggested by the
medical evidence, and this French and the major
agreed to work jointly. The most searching
inquiries were to be made for any one who had
obtained or tried to obtain cocaine or a hypodermic
syringe during a period of several weeks prior to
the tragedy.</p>

<p>In addition to these three there was, of course,
the most important and hopeful line of all, a direct
search for Roper. French undertook to organise
this with as little delay as possible.</p>

<p>After discussing the situation for nearly two
hours the two men parted, hopeful that their several
efforts would before long place the key of the
mystery in their hands.</p>

</div>

<div class="chapter" id="ch16">

<h2>CHAPTER SIXTEEN: A Double Recall</h2>

<p>When French settled down to consider how the
search for Roper could best be carried out he saw
that he was up against a very much steeper
proposition than had appeared at first sight.</p>

<p>There were two ways in which he could attack
the problem. He could attempt to trace the man’s
movements from the night of the fire and go on step
by step until he found him, or he could try to
discover his present whereabouts, irrespective of how
he had arrived there.</p>

<p>The first method was not very hopeful. Not only
was there little to go on, but such trail as the man
must have left was cold. It was now over two
months since the tragedy, and while the passage of
a wanted man during the week previous to an inquiry
might be remembered by porters, taxi-men or others
who come in contact with the public, few would
recall having seen a stranger two months earlier.</p>

<p>Direct search, French thought, was much more
promising. For this he had behind him the whole
of the amazingly complete and far-reaching
organisation of the police. If Roper had not left the
country he would find it hard to evade recognition
by some one of the thousands of constables and
detectives who would be looking out for him.</p>

<p>French remembered that the Kintilloch sergeant
had mentioned that Roper had applied for a
passport to Brazil, and he began operations by writing
to the Yard to send a man to the Passport Office to
obtain a copy of the photograph lodged. Then he
set to work to compile a description of Roper. He
saw Oxley, Whymper, Ruth and one or two others
and got down from them details of the man’s
appearance. From these he synthesised the following:—</p>

<p>“Wanted for murder. John Roper. Age 34;
height about 5 ft. 9 inches; slight build; thick, dark
hair; dark eyes with a decided squint; heavy dark
eyebrows; clean shaven; sallow complexion; small
nose and mouth; pointed chin; small hands and feet;
walks with a slight stoop and a quick step; speaks
in a rather high-pitched voice with a slight
Lowland Scotch accent.”</p>

<p>On the whole French was pleased with the
description. It was more complete than was usually
obtainable from unofficial sources. It had not, of
course, been volunteered by any of his informants,
but had been gradually reached by persistent
questions on each feature in turn. He sent it to the
Yard, asking that it be published in the next issue
of the Police Gazette along with a copy of the
photograph obtained from the Passport Office. This
meant that within three or four days every police
officer in the land would be applying it to newcomers
of less than ten weeks’ standing. If Roper had not
escaped abroad or was not lying hidden in the most
populous district of some great town there was a
very good chance that he might be found.</p>

<p>In his letter to the Yard French had also asked
that systematic inquiries should be made at the
various seaports and from steamship lines to try to find
out if the man had left the country. He suggested
concentrating on lines running to Brazil or calling
at places from which other lines ran to Brazil. Air
lines to the Continent he included as well as the
ordinary cross-channel services, though from these
he scarcely expected a result.</p>

<p>Next he determined to make, so far as he could,
lists of the attendant’s friends, places where he had
spent his holidays, and any other details of his life
that could be ascertained. Frequently he had found
that such vague inquiries produced valuable results.
It was a speculative move, of course, but he thought
it would be worth a couple of days’ work.</p>

<p>As Kintilloch was the most likely place to pick up
such information, he travelled for the second time
to the little Fifeshire town. There he interviewed
every one who, he thought, might help him, but
entirely without result. Even when he visited the
home of the late Flora Roper and discussed the
affair with the unfortunate woman’s mother he
learned nothing valuable.</p>

<p>As he was leaving Kintilloch it occurred to him
as a last forlorn hope that possibly Dr. Philpot
might be able to assist. The address the doctor
had given him was in Glasgow, and to return via
Glasgow was but little out of his way. He decided
he would pay the call on chance.</p>

<p>About five o’clock that afternoon, therefore, he
turned from Dumbarton Road into Kilgore Street
and looked up No. 47. It was a rather decayed
looking apartment house of a shabby-genteel type,
and the landlady who answered his ring gave him
the same impression of having fallen on evil days.
Rather a comedown, French thought, for a man
who had occupied a comfortable villa standing in
its own grounds, to be reduced to this semi-slum
lodging house. With a momentary feeling of pity
he inquired if Dr. Philpot was at home.</p>

<p>“There’s no Dr. Philpot lives here,” the woman
answered in complaining tones. “There’s a <em>Mr.</em>
Philpot, if that’s who you mean.”</p>

<p>“He may not be a doctor; I’m not sure,” French
returned. “The man I mean is fair-haired with a
thin face, and could only have come to you within
the last week.”</p>

<p>“Yes, that’s him all right. But he isn’t in.”</p>

<p>“When do you expect him?”</p>

<p>“He generally comes in about six or half-past.”</p>

<p>“Then I’ll call back.”</p>

<p>French strolled about the parks around Kelvinside
until his watch warned him to return to Kilgore
Street. Philpot had just arrived. He seemed glad
to see French and told of his new life with an
eagerness that the latter thought rather pathetic.</p>

<p>“I hated that place, Inspector,” he went on. “I
didn’t realise it while I was there, but now that I
have left I am surprised how much I hated it. But
I believe I’m going to like my new work. I’ve got
a job, you know.”</p>

<p>“Glad to hear it,” French returned cheerily. “I
hope it’s a good one.”</p>

<p>“It’s too soon to say that. I’m now a commission
agent. It is by the kindness of an old friend.
He has let me have one of his side lines to see how
I get on. It doesn’t sound a promising proposition,
but I confess I’ve been surprised at its possibilities
since I started. It concerns the marketing of
inventions. My friend keeps in touch with the patent
agents and approaches all the smaller patentees,
then if the thing looks good I try to find a
manufacturer or a market. I am to pay him a percentage
of all my takings and already I’ve been in touch
with five inventions, all of which are doing very well.
If my luck holds I hope some day to be able to
square all those people I now owe money to in
Thirsby. Then my idea is to get across to the States
and start afresh.”</p>

<p>French offered his congratulations and as soon
as he reasonably could switched the conversation
over to Roper. Philpot seemed considerably
surprised, but he willingly discussed the attendant and
obviously did his best to satisfy his visitor. He gave
a good deal of information, but only one piece
seemed to French at all useful.</p>

<p>Roper had occasionally visited Peebles. What he
had gone for Philpot did not know, but he believed
his family lived there. Roper had once referred
to his widowed mother and had spoken of going to
Peebles to see her.</p>

<p>“I’m sorry not to be able to give you more help,”
Philpot apologised when French at last showed signs
of coming to an end. “I suppose it would be
indiscreet to inquire what you’re after?”</p>

<p>French hesitated. He had avoided mentioning
his theory to any one except Chief Inspector Mitchell
and Major Valentine, and his working principle in
such cases was reticence. For a moment he was
tempted to confide in Philpot, then habit triumphed
and he prevaricated.</p>

<p>“My dossier of the case is not complete without
all the information I can put into it. It is academic,
of course, but I like to do things thoroughly. Gets
you a reputation for efficiency, you know. One can’t
afford to sneeze at it. Well, doctor, I’m glad to
have seen you and I hope your good luck will
continue.”</p>

<p>It was evident that Philpot realised that he had
been put off, but he made no further reference to
the subject, and his good-bye was cordial enough.
French in his kindly way was pleased to see that
the man had a chance of making good, and his
congratulations and good wishes were really sincere.</p>

<p>After some thought he determined to follow up
the doctor’s clue and next morning he went to
Peebles. There he had little difficulty in finding
Roper’s mother. She kept a huckster’s shop in the
poorer part of the town, but it was evident that
she was getting too old for the work, and that
business was not flourishing. She was suspicious at first,
but under the genial influence of French’s manner
she thawed and presently became garrulous. French
was soon satisfied that she had no idea that her son
might be alive. He pumped her with his usual skill,
pretending he was a former acquaintance of Roper’s,
but in the end also he was unable to learn anything
helpful.</p>

<p>He returned to Thirsby and began a series of
inquiries at the nearby railway stations, posting
establishments, inns and villages, in the hope of coming
on some trace of the quarry. But the trail was too
old. For three days he worked early and late, but
nowhere did he learn of any mysterious stranger
who might prove to be the missing man. He was
indeed about to give up in despair, when his labours
were brought to an unexpected conclusion. Chief
Inspector Mitchell wired an urgent recall to the
Yard.</p>

<p>It was by no means the first of such recalls that
French had received, though it was not usual to
interrupt an officer who was actually engaged in
investigating a case. The incident always bred a slight
uneasiness. The possibility of having made some
serious blunder was ever present. And French was
aware that his most unhappy experiences had
almost invariably followed periods of exaltation and
self-satisfaction. Chief Inspector Mitchell was an
exceedingly shrewd man and he had a perfectly
uncanny way of delving to the bottom of problems
and of seeing clues that other people missed. French
earnestly hoped that it was not so in the present
instance.</p>

<p>He travelled up by the night train and early next
morning reported at the Yard. There he found his
fears were groundless. The Chief Inspector, so far
from grumbling, was in a very good mood and
almost complimented him on what he had done.</p>

<p>“Well, French, you’re up against it again, are
you? What were you busy at when you got my
wire?”</p>

<p>French explained.</p>

<p>“You can do something better. Read that.”</p>

<p>It was the typewritten note of a telephone
conversation. It appeared that at four o’clock on the
previous evening the manager of the Northern
Shires Bank in Throgmorton Avenue had rung up
to say that two twenty-pound notes bearing
numbers on the list supplied in connection with the
Starvel Hollow crime had been passed into the
bank that afternoon. The cashier had just at that
moment made the discovery, but unfortunately he
was unable to remember from whom he had received
them.</p>

<p>“By Jove, sir!” French exclaimed. “Then Roper
is in town!”</p>

<p>“It looks like it if your theory is right,” the Chief
Inspector admitted. “I sent Willis across at once
and he saw the cashier. But the man couldn’t say
where the notes had come from. Willis got him to
prepare a list of all the lodgments he had received
that day, intending, if you didn’t turn up, to go
round the people to-day with Roper’s description.
You had better see him and find out what he has
done. I want you to take over from him at once
as he is really on that Colchester burglary.”</p>

<p>“Very good, sir. Do you know if the notes were
together: if they seemed to have come in from the
same party?”</p>

<p>“Willis asked that. They were not near each
other in the pile. Of course, the argument is not
conclusive, but the suggestion is that they came in
separately.”</p>

<p>“If that is so it looks as if Roper was changing
them systematically.”</p>

<p>“Possibly. In that case we may expect more notes
to come in. That’ll do, French. Go and see Willis
and start right in.”</p>

<p>Inspector Willis was seated at the desk in his
room, apparently trying to reduce to some sort of
order the chaotic heap of papers which covered it.</p>

<p>“Hullo, French! Come in and take a pew,” he
greeted his visitor. “I don’t know any one I’d be
better pleased to see. If you hadn’t turned up within
another ten minutes I was going out about those
blessed notes, but now I shall be able to get down
to Colchester on the next train. I’m on that
burglary at Brodrick’s, the jewellers. You heard about
it?”</p>

<p>“The Chief mentioned it, but I have heard no
details. Interesting case?”</p>

<p>“Nothing out of the way. The place was broken
into from a lane at the back and the safe cut with a
oxyacetylene jet. They got about six thousand
pounds’ worth. It happened that Brodrick had just
sent a lot of stuff to town, else they’d have cleared
twice that.”</p>

<p>“Any line on the men?”</p>

<p>“It was Hot Alf and the Mummer, I believe. It
was their style, and Alf was seen in the town two
days before. But I’ve not got anything definite yet.
There’s a fearful muck of stuff about it: look at all
this.” He indicated the litter on the table.</p>

<p>“No fingerprints?”</p>

<p>“Nope. But I’ll get them through the fences.
I’ve only to sit tight and they’ll give themselves
away. But what about your do? I’ve got it
finished, thank the Lord! There it is.” He pointed
to a little heap of papers apart from the others.
“There’s more in it, the Chief hinted, than stolen
notes, but he didn’t say what it was.”</p>

<p>“There’s pretty well everything in it so far as I
can see,” French rejoined. “Murder—quadruple
murder—theft, arson and body-snatching.”</p>

<p>Willis whistled.</p>

<p>“Body-snatching? Good Lord!” he exclaimed.
“You don’t often hear of that nowadays.”</p>

<p>“You don’t,” French admitted, “but this was not
ordinary body-snatching. You remember the case:
a fire at Starvel in which the three occupants of the
house were supposed to be burned? Well, one
wasn’t. He burgled the place and escaped with the
swag: those notes that you were on to to-day. But
he had to have a body to represent himself, so he
murdered a neighbour and burned his in the house.”</p>

<p>“Lord, French! That’s quite a tale. It would
make a novel, that would. How did you get on
to it?”</p>

<p>French gave a somewhat sketchy résumé of his
activities and so led the conversation back to the
notes. “The Chief said you would give me the
details so that I could get ahead with it to-day.”</p>

<p>“Right-o. The Chief called me in about four
yesterday afternoon and said he’d just had a ’phone
from the Northern Shires Bank that two of the
Starvel notes had been paid in, and as you weren’t
there, I’d better take over. So I went and saw the
teller. He couldn’t say who had given him the
notes, as it was only when he was balancing his cash
after the bank closed that he recognised the
numbers. I got him to make me a list of the lodgments
during the day. That took a bit of time, but he
had it at last. Then I went through it with him
and we eliminated all the entries at which he was
sure that no twenty-pound note was handled. That
left just under two hundred possibles. Then I
brought the list home and went over it again,
ticking off people or firms who do not usually take in
cash from the public, like shipowners, manufacturers
and wholesale dealers. Of course, these are
possibles, but not so likely as the others. It was
rough and ready, but I wanted to tackle the most
probable first. You follow me?”</p>

<p>“Of course. I should have done the same.”</p>

<p>“I waited up until I had put the probables in
location order, and here is the list ready for you.”</p>

<p>“Jolly good, Willis. I’m sorry you had so much
trouble. I’ll carry on and hope for the best.”</p>

<p>“You’ll get it all right,” Willis opined as he
settled down again to his work.</p>

<p>All that day and the next French, armed with
the list and with Roper’s photograph and
description, went from place to place interviewing
managers and assistants in shops and business firms.
But all to no purpose. Nowhere could he obtain
any trace of the elusive twenty-pound notes, nor
had any man answering to the description been seen.
And then to his amazement he was taken off the
inquiry.</p>

<p>Like other officers of the C.I.D., it was his habit
to keep in as close touch with headquarters as
possible while pursuing his investigations. At intervals
therefore during these two days he called up the
Yard and reported his whereabouts. It was during
one of these communications that for the second
time in two days he received an urgent recall.</p>

<p>In this case it was a summons which he could
obey promptly, and twenty minutes after receiving
the message he was knocking at the door of Chief
Inspector Mitchell’s room.</p>

<p>One glance at the Chief’s face showed him that
at least there was no trouble brewing, Mitchell
greeting him with a half smile.</p>

<p>“Sit down, French,” he said, “and listen to me.
I want to tell you a story.”</p>

<p>After glancing at a few papers which he took
from a drawer, he began to speak.</p>

</div>

<div class="chapter" id="ch17">

<h2>CHAPTER SEVENTEEN: Concerning Wedding Rings</h2>

<p>“This morning about 10.30,” said the Chief
Inspector, “we had a ’phone from Inspector Marshall
of the Whitechapel District. He wanted to know
whether we had had any recent reports of thefts of
small jewellery, as he had come across some in
connection with a scrap between two lightermen. It
seems that about ten o’clock last night a constable
on patrol heard cries coming from an entry off Cable
Street, as if some one was being murdered. He
ran down and found a man on the ground with
another belabouring him furiously with his fists.
The constable pulled the victor off, to find his
opponent was little the worse. The fellow was really
more frightened than hurt. The constable would
have dismissed the affair with a good-humoured
caution to both, had it not been that in the heat of the
explanations the cause of the quarrel came out. The
men had obtained some jewellery, which both
claimed, and when the constable saw the stuff he
didn’t wait for further discussion, but marched them
both off to Divisional Headquarters. Marshall
questioned them and reported their statements with
his inquiry.</p>

<p>“The whole thing so far was purely commonplace,
and if the jewellery had consisted of ordinary
trinkets I should have thought no more about
it. But the nature of the stuff tickled my fancy and
I grew interested. You would hardly guess what
they had. Wedding rings!”</p>

<p>“I certainly shouldn’t have guessed that, sir.”</p>

<p>“I don’t suppose you would. Well, that’s what
they had. Thirty-nine wedding rings on a cord.
They were all much of the same size and value.
And there was not another ring. They were
searched, but nothing else was found on them.</p>

<p>“Marshall, of course, asked them where they got
them, and their answer was more interesting still.
It appeared that the victor, James Gray, was the
skipper of a Thames lighter and the vanquished,
William Fuller, was his ‘crew.’ A third man was
on board who looked after the engine, but he didn’t
come into the affair. Gray stated that about 8.30
that same evening they were working empty down
the river. They had left a cargo of Belgian coal
at an up-river works and were running down to their
moorings for the night. They usually stopped about
six, but trouble with their engine had delayed them
on this occasion. It was rather a dirty night,
raining and very dark and blowing a little. Gray, the
skipper, was at the helm and Fuller was forward
acting as look-out. The third man was below at
the engines. Just as they began to emerge from
beneath the Tower Bridge Fuller heard a smack on
the deck beside him. He looked down and in the
light of some of the shore lamps saw some bright
objects rolling about on the planks. On picking
one up he was astonished to find it was a wedding
ring. He began to search and found several others,
but the skipper swore at him for not minding his
job, and he had to let the remainder lie. When
they reached their moorings he tried again, but Gray
was curious and came forward and found a ring
himself. Then they had a proper look with
lanterns and recovered the thirty-nine. Immediately,
as might be expected, a row broke out. Both men
wanted the rings. Fuller said they had fallen
beside him and he had found all but one or two, but
Gray held that he was skipper and that anything
that came on the ship was his. They had to bury
the hatchet temporarily so as not to give away the
secret to their engineer, but the quarrel broke out
again ashore, Fuller’s cries attracting our man.
What do you think of that, French? A good story,
isn’t it?”</p>

<p>“Like a book, sir. Just a bit humorous too, if you
don’t mind my saying so.”</p>

<p>There was a twinkle in Chief Inspector Mitchell’s
eye as he continued:—</p>

<p>“Oh, you think so, do you? Well, anyhow, as I
say, I was interested. The men’s mentality I found
quite intriguing. I wondered how much imagination
they had between them. Marshall described
them as slow, unintelligent, bovine fellows. Now,
such men could never have invented a tale like that.
If they had been making it up they would have said
they found a bag of rings in the street. The idea
of wedding rings having been thrown over the
parapet of the Tower Bridge just as they were passing
beneath would only occur to men of imagination,
and to have got all the details right would have
involved a very considerable gift of invention as
well. Do you see what I’m getting at, French?
Their story shows too much imagination for their
intelligences as described by Marshall, and
therefore I am disposed to accept it.”</p>

<p>Chief Inspector Mitchell paused and looked at
French as if expecting a comment.</p>

<p>“I follow you all right, sir, and what you say
sounds reasonable to me. And yet it’s not very
likely that any one would throw thirty-nine wedding
rings into the Thames off the Tower Bridge, for I
take it it was into the river and not on to the boat
they were intended to go.”</p>

<p>“I should say undoubtedly.” Mitchell sat for a
moment drumming with his fingers on his desk and
looking thoughtfully out of the window. “You think
the whole thing’s unlikely, do you? Perhaps you
are right. And yet I don’t know. I think I can
imagine circumstances in which a man might be very
anxious to get rid of thirty-nine wedding rings. And
what’s more, to throw them over the parapet of the
Tower Bridge at 8.30 in the evening seems to me
a jolly good way of getting rid of them. How
would you have done it, French?”</p>

<p>French glanced at his superior in some surprise.
He could not understand the other’s interest in this
commonplace story of stolen rings. Still less could
he understand why he had been interrupted in his
useful and important work to come and listen to it.
However, he realised that it would be tactless to
say so.</p>

<p>“I don’t know, sir,” he answered slowly. “I
suppose to throw ’em in the river would be the best
way. But he should have seen there was nothing
passing underneath.”</p>

<p>“Ah, now that is an interesting point also. But
first, does anything else strike you?”</p>

<p>French looked wary.</p>

<p>“Just in what way, sir?”</p>

<p>“This. Suppose you want to throw a package into
the river and you want to do it absolutely
unobserved. Where will you do it?”</p>

<p>“I see what you mean, sir. That bridge at that
time of night is about as deserted as any of the
London bridges.”</p>

<p>“Exactly, that’s what I mean. There is evidence
there of selection which would never strike a man
like these bargees. But you say he ought to have
seen the boat. Why should our unknown not have
looked out for passing boats? I’ll tell you, I think.
Though the bridge is <em>comparatively</em> deserted, it is
<em>not</em> deserted. To look over the parapet far enough
to see the water below would have attracted
attention. A suicide might have been feared. Some
officious person might have come forward. No, the
unknown would simply chuck his parcel over without
even turning his head, secure in the belief that even
if by some miracle it was found, the contents would
never be traced to him. Do you agree?”</p>

<p>“Seems quite sound, sir.”</p>

<p>“It may be sound or it may not,” Mitchell
returned. “All that I have been saying to you may
be the merest nonsense. But it shows, I think, that
the story these men told may be true. The chances
of its being true are sufficiently great to warrant
investigation before they are charged with theft.
You agree with that?”</p>

<p>This time French felt no doubt.</p>

<p>“Oh, yes, sir, I agree with that certainly. The
men could not be convicted without going into their
story.”</p>

<p>The Chief Inspector nodded as if he had at last
reached the goal for which he had so long been
aiming.</p>

<p>“That’s it, French. Now will you start in and do
it?”</p>

<p>French stared.</p>

<p>“Me, sir?” he exclaimed as if unable to believe
his ears. “Do you wish me to take it up?”</p>

<p>The other smiled satirically.</p>

<p>“I don’t know any one who could do it better.”</p>

<p>“And drop my present case?”</p>

<p>“Only temporarily,” the Chief assured him. “A
day or so will make little difference to your own
affair, and I have no one else to send on this one.
Look into it and try and find out if any one dropped
those rings off the bridge, and if so, who he was
and why he did it. When you have done that you
can go ahead with the Starvel affair.”</p>

<p>French was completely puzzled. This was very
unlike the line the Chief usually took.</p>

<p>“Of course, sir, it’s what you say; but do you
not think it is very urgent that this bank-note
business be followed up while the trail is warm? Every
day that passes will make it more difficult to get
the truth.”</p>

<p>“That applies even more strongly to this other
affair. But it has the advantage of probably being
a shorter inquiry. With luck you can finish it off
to-morrow, and if so, that will delay the larger case
only very slightly.”</p>

<p>French saw that whatever might be the Chief’s
motive, he had made up his mind.</p>

<p>“Very good, sir,” he returned. “I’ll go down
to Whitechapel at once and get started.”</p>

<p>“Right, I wish you would.”</p>

<p>French was conscious of not a little exasperation
as he walked to Charing Cross and there took an
eastward bound train. A few hours might make
all the difference between success and failure in the
Starvel case, and here he was turned on to this other
business during the very period when it was most
important he should be on his own job. He could
not understand what was at the back of the Chief
Inspector’s mind. Apparently he suspected a crime,
though what crime he had in view French could not
imagine. Marshall could have dealt with ordinary
petty theft. But if Mr. Mitchell suspected a
serious crime and if, as he said, no other officer was
available to investigate the affair, his attitude would
be explained.</p>

<p>But whether it were explained or not orders were
orders, and French with an effort switched his mind
off John Roper and on to lightermen and wedding
rings. On arrival at Divisional Headquarters he
saw Inspector Marshall and heard his account of
the affair, which was almost word for word that
of the Chief Inspector’s.</p>

<p>“I don’t know what the Chief’s got in his mind,”
French grumbled. “Here was I on that Starvel case
and on a hot scent too, and why he should switch
me off on to this affair I can’t see. He’s got some
bee in his bonnet about it. He believes these
fellows’ yarn and he wants me to find the man who
threw the rings over.”</p>

<p>Marshall made noises indicative of surprise and
sympathy. “I shouldn’t have thought the Chief
Inspector would have stood for that dope,” he
remarked. “What are you going to do about it?”</p>

<p>French didn’t exactly know. He supposed he had
better hear the men’s story for himself, though, of
course, after his colleague had examined them his
doing so would be only a matter of form to satisfy
the Chief. Then he would think over the affair
and try to plan his next move.</p>

<p>But rather to his own surprise, French found
himself considerably impressed by the two men’s
personalities and the way they told their story. Both
were heavy and slow-witted and, French judged,
without any imagination at all, and both seemed
reasonably honest. After he had questioned them
he felt very much inclined to accept his Chief’s view
and to believe the tale.</p>

<p>“You say you found the rings by the light of a
hand lamp,” he went on presently. “Very good.
Come along down with me to this boat of yours
and we’ll have another look by daylight. Perhaps
you missed a few.”</p>

<p>The men didn’t think so, but they were very
willing to do anything which got them out of the police
station. They led the two inspectors to the dirtiest
wharf that French had ever seen, and there hailing
a man in a wherry, the four were put aboard the
Thames lighter <i>Fickle Jane</i>.</p>

<p>She was a long low craft more like a canal boat
than a lighter. Nine-tenths of her was hold, but
at one end there was a tiny fo’csle and at the other
an equally diminutive engine-room. She was steered
by a small wheel aft.</p>

<p>“Now,” French said to the “crew,” “go and stand
just where you were when the rings came down.”</p>

<p>Fuller moved to the fo’csle and took up a
position on the port side of the companion.</p>

<p>“And where did the rings strike?”</p>

<p>“Couldn’t just say to a foot, guv’nor,” the man
answered, “but abaht that there bolt ’ead or maybe
a bit forra’d.”</p>

<p>The point he indicated was starboard of the
companion and mid-way between it and the side of the
boat. French saw that objects falling at that point
might scatter in any direction, and he began a
careful search for further rings.</p>

<p>In less than a minute he found one. It had rolled
down along the strip of deck at the side of the
hold and jammed itself in a crack of the coaming
timbers.</p>

<p>This discovery seemed to French to prove the
men’s story completely. He took their addresses and
told them they were free and that if the owner of
the rings could not be found they would be
returned to them. He wanted them, however, to
come up with him to the Tower Bridge and show
him the exact point at which the incident had
occurred, but for this they would be paid.</p>

<p>He was frankly puzzled as he stood looking over
the parapet of the bridge after Gray and Fuller
had gone. As far as he could see there was
absolutely nothing in the nature of a clue to the person
he sought. The rings were probably stolen, but
not, he imagined, from a jeweller. Rather, he
pictured some street row in which a hawker had been
relieved of his stock-in-trade. Though, if this had
been done, he could not imagine why the stock should
have been thrown away.</p>

<p>There were, of course, some obvious steps to be
taken, but French hesitated over them because he
did not think any of them could bring in useful
information. However, he couldn’t stand there all
day, and he might as well get on with all the lines
of inquiry that suggested themselves.</p>

<p>First, he called at the Yard and arranged that
any constables who had been on patrol duty on or
near the Tower Bridge at 8.30 the previous evening
should be found and sent to him for interrogation.
Then with the rings in his pocket he went to a small
jeweller’s shop in the Strand, of which he knew the
proprietor.</p>

<p>“I want your help, Mr. Alderdice,” he said as
they shook hands in the little private room at the
back of the shop. “I’m trying to find some one who
amuses himself by throwing wedding rings into the
Thames,” and he told his story, concluding: “Now
I wondered if you could tell me anything about these
rings which would help me. Have you heard of any
thefts of rings? Is there any way of identifying
or tracing these? Might they be sold by a hawker,
or would they be more probably from a jeweller’s
shop? Any information that you could give me
would be most gratefully received.”</p>

<p>Mr. Alderdice, a precise, dried-up little man,
rubbed his chin thoughtfully.</p>

<p>“Well, you know, Mr. French,” he said, “I don’t
believe that I can think of anything in my trade
about which I could give you less help. There are,
as you know, millions of wedding rings in this city
alone, and they are all more or less alike. In fact,
sir, you might as well try to identify a given nail
in an ironmonger’s bin. I don’t think it’s possible.
Needless to say though, I’ll do what I can. Let
me see the rings.”</p>

<p>He took the bunch, nattily untied the knot on
the cord which held them, and taking the rings
one by one, examined each carefully.</p>

<p>“They are all of eighteen carat gold,” he said
in the manner of an expert pronouncing a deliberate
judgment. “They are fairly well the same size and
thickness and would sell from thirty to thirty-five
shillings each, according to weight. I do not know
much about the hawkers you refer to, but I should
imagine that they would content themselves with
a rather inferior article, and that these rings were
sold by reputable jewellers. I have not heard of
any cases of robbery of such rings. I do not see
how you or any one else could trace their sales, but
of course that is speaking from my point of view:
you gentlemen from the Yard have a wonderful
way of finding out things.”</p>

<p>French made a grimace. “I’m afraid my job’s
not very hopeful,” he bewailed as he thanked his
friend and took his leave.</p>

<p>He walked slowly back to the Yard, thinking
intently. This was one of those hateful jobs in which
you had to work from the general; to deal with the
whole of the possible sources of information
concerned. He would now have to apply to all the
jewellers’ shops in London—a tremendous job.
How much he preferred working from the particular!
In that case, to complete the parallel, he
would get a clue which would lead to the one shop
or group of shops he required. But here the
situation was reversed. He would have to deal with
all jewellers, and he did not know exactly what he
was to ask them.</p>

<p>He made several drafts and at last produced a
circular which he considered satisfactory. In it he
said that the Yard desired to trace a person who had
got rid of forty wedding rings on the night of
Monday, 6th December, of which the particulars were
as followed, and that he would be obliged for any
information which might help. In particular he
wished to know whether any wedding rings had
disappeared or been stolen recently. Failing that he
would be grateful for the description as far as it
could be ascertained, of all persons who had bought
wedding rings within the previous four days, with
the date and approximate hour of the purchase.
Replies, which would be treated as entirely
confidential, were to be sent to Inspector French at New
Scotland Yard.</p>

<p>He set some men to work with directories to find
out the addresses of jewellers in London and made
arrangements to have the necessary copies of his
circular prepared and delivered. Then he organised
a staff to deal with the replies when they came in.
Finally, having cleared his conscience with regard
to the rings episode, he returned to his work on the
bank-note case, picking up the thread at the point
at which he had left off.</p>

<p>By next morning several hundred answers to his
circular had been received and others were arriving
continuously. Reluctantly he gave up the bank-note
question and went to his office to have a look over
them.</p>

<p>In accordance with his instructions, his staff had
prepared a statement to which they added the
information given in each reply. One column they had
headed “Robberies and Disappearance of rings,”
and a glance down this showed French that none
such had occurred. In a number of other columns
they had put information about purchasers. These
columns were headed with certain details of
appearance, such as estimated age—over or under thirty,
forty-five and sixty; tall, medium and short, dark
and fair, with and without glasses, and so on. By
this means it became possible to determine whether
the same person might have dealt in more than one
shop.</p>

<p>There were a great many columns and comparatively
few entries in each, and of those in the same
column nearly all were distinguished by differences
in other columns. Of course the vast number of
the descriptions were vague and incomplete and
most of the shops recorded purchases in connection
with which the assistants could recall nothing of the
purchaser. But this was only to be expected, and
French worked with such results as he could get.</p>

<p>Of the 631 replies entered up, French gradually
eliminated 625. The remaining six he examined
more carefully, whistling gently as he did so. They
were all under the general divisions, “Homburg
hat,” “fawn coat,” “dark,” “with moustache,” and
“with glasses.” But this in itself conveyed little.
It merely indicated a possibility. But when he
found that four of the six shops were in the same
street and that the purchases in all four had been
made on the same day and at almost the same hour,
his interest suddenly quickened. French considered
that the matter was worth a personal call, and
leaving the Yard, he drove to the first of the six and
asked to see the manager.</p>

<p>“We’re very sorry to have given you all this
trouble,” he began as he produced the reply they
had sent in, “but the matter is really important.
This may be possibly the man we want. Could I
see the assistant who attended to him?”</p>

<p>In a few seconds a Mr. Stanley was produced
and French asked him to repeat his description of
his customer.</p>

<p>“I remember the man quite clearly, sir,” Stanley
answered. “He had very dark hair and a thick,
dark moustache and dark glasses. He wore a soft,
gray Homburg hat and a fawn-coloured coat.”</p>

<p>“It is a pleasure to deal with you, Mr. Stanley,”
French smiled. “You are certainly very observant.
Now tell me, how do you come to remember the
man so clearly?”</p>

<p>“I don’t think there was any special reason, sir.
Unless it was that I happened to look out of the
window and saw him get out of a taxi, and that sort
of fixed my attention on him. The taxi waited while
he was in the shop and he got into it again and
drove off when he had bought the ring.”</p>

<p>This was very satisfactory. If the customer was
really the man French wanted, here was a clue and
a valuable one. To find the taxi which had stopped
at the shop at a given time on the previous day
should not be difficult. He continued his questions.</p>

<p>“At what hour was that?”</p>

<p>“About half-past eleven,” the salesman said after
some thought. “I couldn’t say for sure, but it was
about an hour before I went for dinner and that
was at half-past twelve.”</p>

<p>“He didn’t seem at all agitated, I suppose?”</p>

<p>“No, sir. Not more than most of them.” Stanley
smiled knowingly, and French felt that only
for the sobering presence of the manager a wink
would have conveyed the man’s thought. “Most of
them are a bit, shall we say, nervous. But this
man was just the same as the rest. He gave a size
and said he wanted a medium weight, and that was
all that passed.”</p>

<p>French nodded, and reverting to the description,
tried for some further details with which to
augment it. Though he had complimented Stanley on
it, he realised that as it stood it was of little use.
But the young man was unable to improve on his
former effort and French was about to thank the
two men and leave the shop when Stanley chanced
to drop a phrase which sent the detective into a
white heat of excitement and made him marvel at
Chief Inspector Mitchell’s perspicacity and his own
obtuseness.</p>

<p>“And there was nothing in the slightest degree
out of the ordinary in the whole transaction, no
matter how trivial?” he had asked as a sort of general
finale to his catechism, more as a matter of form
than because he hoped to gain any information, and
it was in reply that the assistant, after saying: “No,
sir, I don’t think so,” had pronounced the priceless
words: “Unless you would call changing a large
note out of the ordinary. The man hadn’t enough
loose change to make up the thirty-five shillings and
he asked me to change a twenty-pound note.”</p>

<p>“What!” roared French with a delighted oath,
springing to his feet in his excitement. So that was
it! He saw it all now! Like a flash this whole
mysterious business of the wedding rings became
clear as day. And the Chief had guessed! Moreover
the Chief had given him a broad hint and he,
like the <em>ass</em> that he was, had missed its meaning!
He sat down and wiped his forehead.</p>

<p>Who was this mysterious individual, this dark-haired
man with moustache and glasses, but Roper!
Roper it was who had been going about buying
wedding rings, and Roper it was who naturally found
that he must get rid of such incriminating purchases
at the earliest possible moment. The whole thing
was clear! For every ring a £20 note, a tainted £20
note, a £20 note from Mr. Averill’s wrecked safe up
at Starvel. And for every £20 note got rid of over
£18 of good, clean, untraceable money brought in.
It was a scheme, a great scheme, worthy of the
man who had devised the crime as a whole.</p>

<p>As these thoughts passed through his mind French
saw that the fact that the elusive purchaser had a
moustache and glasses while Roper wore neither by
no means invalidated his conclusion, but rather
strengthened it. To a person of Roper’s mental
calibre a moustache would appear one of the best
of disguises, while a man with a squint had
practically no option but to wear tinted glasses if he
wished to preserve his incognito. From disgust
at his job French had suddenly swung round to
enthusiasm. He had not now the faintest doubt that
some forty-eight hours earlier, Roper, alive and in
the flesh, had been in that very shop, having
dealings with the salesman, Stanley. And then came
the delightful thought that with so fresh a trail and
with such a multiplicity of clues, the man’s capture
was a question of a very short time only. The steps
to be taken were obvious, and the first was to find
the taxi-man who had driven him round. This must
be put in hand without delay.</p>

<p>He crushed down his impatience and turned once
more to his companions, who had been regarding
him with not a little surprise.</p>

<p>“That is important information you have just
given me, Mr. Stanley,” he declared. “Now can
you tell me if this is the man?” He handed over
one of Roper’s photographs.</p>

<p>And then his enthusiasm received a check. The
salesman looked doubtfully at the card and shook
his head.</p>

<p>“I don’t know,” he said slowly. “I couldn’t just
be sure. It’s like him and it’s not like him, if you
understand what I mean. The man who came here
had a moustache.”</p>

<p>“A false one,” French suggested.</p>

<p>The other brightened up.</p>

<p>“My word, but it might have been,” he exclaimed.
“I noticed it looked queer, now I come to think of
it. It was very thick and long; thicker and longer
than you generally see. And what you might call
fuzzy round the top. Not like a real moustache.
Yes, sir, I believe you’re right. It looked just like
a wad of hair set on.”</p>

<p>French laid a scrap of paper over the mouth.</p>

<p>“Now look “again.”</p>

<p>Once more Stanley shook his head.</p>

<p>“No, sir, it’s no good. I couldn’t say for sure.
You see that photograph shows his hair and his
forehead and his eyes. Well, I didn’t see any of
those. He had tinted glasses and he wore his hat
low down near his eyebrows. I couldn’t tell. It
might have been him and it might not.”</p>

<p>“Well, if you can’t you can’t, and that’s all there
is to it. Now another point. Have you the
twenty-pound note?”</p>

<p>The manager disappeared, returning in a moment
with a handful of money.</p>

<p>“Here are seven twenty-pound notes: all of that
value we hold,” he explained. “I cannot tell you
certainly whether that paid in by your friend is
among them; but it probably is, as the cashier thinks
she did not give such a note in change and no
lodgment was made at the bank since the sale.”</p>

<p>Eagerly French compared the numbers of the
seven with those on his list, but this time he had
no luck. If one of these had come from Starvel it
was one of which Tarkington had not retained the
number.</p>

<p>In spite of this French was certain that he had
discovered the truth. But he felt that before acting
on his theory he must put it to the proof.
Fortunately there was a very obvious way of doing so.
If he traced another sale and found that another
£20 note had been tendered, no further doubt could
possibly remain.</p>

<p>Pausing only to ascertain from the salesman that
his customer had spoken with a Scotch accent, French
hurried down the street to the next address on his
list. There he had a somewhat different question
to put to the manager. He was looking for a man
who had within the last three or four days bought
a wedding ring and who had paid for it with a £20
note. No, the manager need not be apprehensive.
The note was good and the whole business in order:
it was simply a question of tracing the man.</p>

<p>Inquiries speedily produced the desired
information. A Mr. Russell was sent for who had sold
the ring in question. He remembered the purchaser,
a slightish man of medium height with a heavy black
moustache, a sallow complexion and tinted glasses.
Owing to the latter he had not noted the colour
of the man’s eyes, but he had observed that his hair
was long and very dark and that his hands were
small. He thought the man might be the original
of the photograph, but he could not be sure. When
the bill had been made out the man had searched
his pockets and had been unable to produce
sufficient change. He had said: “I’m afraid I’m
short: I thought I had another ten-shilling note.
Can you change twenty pounds?” The salesman had
replied, “Certainly, sir,” and the man had handed
over a £20 note. Both the salesman and the cashier
had examined it carefully and both were satisfied
it was genuine. Unfortunately it had since been
paid away and they could not therefore produce it.</p>

<p>This information resolved French’s last doubt and
he hailed a taxi and ordered the man to hurry to
the Yard. He was more than delighted with his
day. At long last he was on a hot trail. With
the vast resources of the C.I.D. at his disposal it
could not now be long before he had his hands on
the criminal of Starvel and had accomplished that
triumph which was to be another milestone on the
road which led to promotion.</p>

</div>

<div class="chapter" id="ch18">

<h2>CHAPTER EIGHTEEN: Cumulative Evidence</h2>

<p>Inspector French’s satisfaction in this new
development was but slightly marred by his knowledge
that a certain amount of the credit for it must be
allotted to his Chief. Mr. Mitchell had certainly
spotted the true significance of the discarding of the
wedding rings, but French now saw that this was
a comparatively unimportant achievement. In the
first place it was not due to superior ability, but to
the lucky accident that the rings had fallen on
the lighter instead of going overboard. In the
second—and this French thought fundamental—the
episode at the best had only hastened matters.
If he had been left alone he would certainly have
traced one of the notes. Perhaps indeed this would
have proved quicker in the end.</p>

<p>But what, French asked himself, had led to the
whole dénouement? Was it not his, French’s,
foresight and ingenuity at the inquest? He had
devised and skilfully baited a trap for his victim, and
lo! the victim had walked into it with the most
commendable promptness. He had fallen for the dope,
as French’s former acquaintance, Mrs. Chauncey S.
Root of Pittsburgh, would have put it. And now
a little energetic action and the man would pay the
price of his folly.</p>

<p>For some time after reaching his room French
busied himself in putting in motion against the
ingenious purchaser of rings the great machine of
which he was a part. A telephone warning was
sent to all stations that the man whose description
had already been circulated in connection with the
Starvel murders had disguised himself with a
moustache and tinted glasses and had recently been in
London occupied in certain business involving taxis
and wedding rings. A number of men were put
on to trace the taxi or taxis employed, others to try
to obtain further information at the jewellers’, while
still others were sent round the hotels in the hope
of picking up a scent. It was not indeed until the
late afternoon that French had time to settle down
really to consider where he now stood.</p>

<p>In the first place it was clear not only that Roper
had remained in the country, but that he had kept
himself in touch with events in Thirsby. Of course
this latter did not mean much, for the circumstances
of the Starvel case had created widespread interest
and the details which came out at the inquest were
fully reported in the papers. But Roper had
evidently been uncertain as to how much the police
knew, and French’s evidence had had the desired
reassuring effect.</p>

<p>It might, of course, have happened that Roper’s
hand had been forced. He might have run out of
cash to live on or he might have required a lump
sum, say, to leave the country. But whatever the
reason, he had determined on a coup. And very
cleverly he had arranged it. He must have made
over £18 a purchase, and if he bought forty rings
in a day his profits would amount to over £700.
£700 a day was not bad.</p>

<p>The following day was Sunday, but by Monday
evening reports had begun to come in from French’s
little army of workers. Sixteen more shops had
been found at which Roper had bought rings and
changed £20 notes, and one of these notes bore a
Starvel number. Moreover it had been established
that his activities had extended over at least three
days. Inquiries at the fashionable restaurants had
revealed the fact that on the Tuesday a man answering
Roper’s description had paid for his lunch at
the Carlton with a similar note. French received
these items thankfully, and having made a skeleton
time-table of the three days in question, fitted each
item into its appropriate place.</p>

<p>But none of those who had come in contact with
Roper had been able to add to his knowledge of the
man or to give a clue to his present whereabouts.
It was not indeed until the middle of the following
forenoon that information came in which promised
more satisfactory results.</p>

<p>Within ten minutes of each other two telephone
messages were received stating that taximen who
drove Roper had been found. These men on discovery
had been ordered to report themselves at
the Yard, and they arrived almost simultaneously.
French had them up to his room in turn.</p>

<p>The first driver said he had been hailed by a man
of the description in question about 10.0 a.m. on
Tuesday of last week. The fare had explained that
he wished to engage his vehicle up till one o’clock.
He was a traveller in precious stones and he wished
to be taken to certain jewellers of which he had
a list. The taximan had done as he was asked.
Starting near the Marble Arch, he had visited one
jeweller after another during the whole morning.
Shortly after one the fare had instructed him to
drive to Marylebone Station, which was then close
by. There the taxi had been paid off, the fare
disappearing into the station.</p>

<p>Asked if he could remember all the shops he
called at, the man said he thought he could, and
French at once despatched Sergeant Carter with
him to drive over the same ground and make
inquiries <i lang="fr">en route</i>.</p>

<p>The second taximan had a very similar story
to tell. About three o’clock on the Thursday
afternoon he was driving slowly down Aldwych, when
he was hailed by a man of the description the
sergeant had given him. The man had engaged him
by the hour and had told him of his business in
precious stones and they had driven to a number of
jewellers, ending up about five-thirty at Malseed’s,
in the Strand. There the man had paid him off
and he had seen him entering the shop as he drove
away.</p>

<p>This driver also said he could remember the
places at which he had called, and French sent
another of his satellites round with him to amass
information.</p>

<p>As far as it went, this was satisfactory enough.
If the other taximen could be found, every minute
of Roper’s three days would soon be accounted for.
And it would be a strange thing if amongst all those
with whom he had come in contact, some one person
had not learnt or noticed anything which would
help to find him. French could recall many instances
where a chance recollection of some physical
peculiarity, of some word or phrase uttered, of some
paper or small article dropped, had led to the
identification of a criminal and he thought the chances
of similar good fortune in the present instance were
not too remote.</p>

<p>All through the afternoon information continued
to come in, and when he had added the items to his
skeleton time-table he found that he had learnt
where thirty-one rings had been bought and where
Roper had lunched on each of the three days in
question. Of course, this information did not directly
help with his present problem, but there were two
other items of news which seemed more promising.</p>

<p>The first was that seven of the thirty-one shop
assistants who had been interviewed had noticed
a fresh cut on Roper’s thumb, small, but peculiarly
shaped. This was an additional identification which
might be useful in dealing with waiters, dining-car
attendants, hotel porters and others who would be
likely to observe a customer’s hand.</p>

<p>The second item French received with deep
satisfaction. Roper had spent the Tuesday night at the
Strand Palace Hotel. This seemed to negative the
suggestion that the man was living in London, and
French therefore became much more hopeful of the
prospects of finding his whereabouts on the
Thursday night, the point at which he must start if he
was to succeed in tracing him.</p>

<p>But it was not until the next afternoon that his
hopes were fulfilled. When he reached the Yard
after lunch he found that a telephone message had
just been received from Sergeant Elliott, who was
working the hotels in the Bloomsbury area. Roper,
the man reported, had spent the Thursday night at
the Peveril Hotel in Russell Square.</p>

<p>Within twenty minutes French had reached the
building. Sergeant Elliott was waiting for him in
the lounge.</p>

<p>“How did you get on to him?” French asked,
after they had greeted each other heartily and
withdrawn into a quiet corner.</p>

<p>“Just pegging away, sir; no special clue. This
is the sixteenth hotel I’ve been to. But I think
there’s no doubt it’s him. He turned up here about
7.15 on Thursday evening and asked for a room.
On the plea of having a chill he had a fire in his
room and dined there. Next morning he paid his
bill to the waiter and left about 9.45.”</p>

<p>“Did he take a taxi?”</p>

<p>“Not from the hotel, sir. He just walked out,
carrying a small suitcase in his hand.”</p>

<p>“Wasn’t taking any risks. Confound him for
giving us all this trouble. See Elliott, you look round
and get hold of the men who were on point duty
hereabouts on Friday morning. Some of them may
have noticed him. Then go round to the nearby
Tube Stations. I’ll go back to the Yard and get the
taxis and the terminal stations worked. You follow
me?”</p>

<p>“Right, sir. I’ll go now.”</p>

<p>French turned to the manager’s office to check his
subordinate’s information. There his inquiries
speedily convinced him that Roper had indeed stayed
in the hotel. It was true that he had registered
under the name “Jas. Fulton, Manchester,” but the
handwriting set the matter at rest. That it was
Roper’s, French had no doubt whatever.</p>

<p>Except that one of the waiters had noticed the
cut on the man’s right thumb, this unfortunately was
the only result of his inquiries. Though he was as
thorough and painstaking as ever, he could find no
clue to the man’s present whereabouts.</p>

<p>Returning to the Yard, he recalled the men who
were engaged on the hotels and jewellers’ shops and
set them new tasks. Some of them were to look for
a taximan who had taken up a fare of the suspect’s
description in the neighbourhood of Russell Square
about 9.45 on the morning of the previous Friday,
the remainder were to visit the great stations in the
hope of learning that the same man had left by train.</p>

<p>French was accustomed to prompt and efficient
service, but when within an hour the wanted taximan
had been found, he could not but admit pleasurable
surprise. He therefore paid a somewhat unusual
compliment to his subordinate on his prowess, and
told him to fetch the man along.</p>

<p>The driver proved to be a big brawny Irishman.
He stated he had picked up a fare like the man
described at the Russell Square end of Southampton
Row about the hour named. The man had carried a
small suitcase and had been walking away from the
Square. The driver had not seen his face clearly, as
he had his collar turned up and his hat pulled low,
but when French heard that he spoke with a Scotch
accent, he felt that things were going as they should.
It was therefore with keen interest that he waited
for a reply to the question, where had he driven
him?</p>

<p>“To Gracechurch Street, sorr,” the man answered,
“to a block o’ buildings half-way down the street on
the left-hand side.”</p>

<p>“Could you find it again?”</p>

<p>“I could, sorr, surely.”</p>

<p>“Then drive there.”</p>

<p>An inspection of the plates at each side of the
entrance door showed that the “block o’ buildings”
contained eleven suites of offices. French stood
contemplating the names and wondering in which of the
firms Roper had been interested.</p>

<p>None of them seemed very promising at first sight.
There were two coal merchants, a chemical analyst,
a stockbroker, an engineer and architect, three
shipping firms and three commission agents. Of these
the shipping firms seemed the most hopeful and
French decided to start with them.</p>

<p>Obtaining no information at the shipping offices,
he went on to the remaining firms, and at the seventh
he struck oil. The office boy at Messrs. Dashwood
and Munce’s stockbrokers, remembered such a man
calling at the hour in question. He had, he believed,
seen Mr. Dashwood, and it was not long before
French was seated in the senior partner’s room.</p>

<p>Mr. Dashwood, a tall, thin man with a shrewd
expression and keen eyes, listened attentively while
French stated his business.</p>

<p>“I admit,” he said, “that the description you give
resembles that of our client. But you must be aware,
Inspector, that a client’s dealings are confidential,
and unless you can prove to me that this is really the
man you want and that it is my duty to discuss his
business I do not think I feel called on to say any
more.”</p>

<p>“I thoroughly appreciate your position,” French
returned suavely, “and under ordinary circumstances
agree that you would be absolutely right. But these
circumstances are not ordinary. Firstly, here are
my credentials, so that you will see that I really am
an officer of Scotland Yard. Secondly, I must take
you into my confidence to the extent of telling you
that the man is wanted for a very serious crime
indeed—a triple murder, in fact. You will see,
therefore, that you cannot keep back any information
about him which you may possess.”</p>

<p>Mr. Dashwood shrugged.</p>

<p>“What you say alters the matter. Tell me what
you wish to know.”</p>

<p>“First, your client’s name and address.”</p>

<p>Mr. Dashwood consulted a small ledger.</p>

<p>“Mr. Arthur Lisle Whitman, c/o Mr. Andrew
Macdonald, 18 Moray Street, Pentland Avenue,
Edinburgh.”</p>

<p>“Was he an old client?”</p>

<p>“No, I had never seen him before.”</p>

<p>“And what was his business?”</p>

<p>“He wished us to purchase some stock for him.”</p>

<p>“Oh,” said French. “Did he pay for it?”</p>

<p>“Yes, he paid in advance.”</p>

<p>“In notes of £10 and less in value, I suppose?”</p>

<p>Mr. Dashwood shot a keen glance at the other.</p>

<p>“That’s right,” he admitted. “It seemed a
peculiar way of doing things, but he explained that he
was a bookmaker and had been doing some big
business lately.”</p>

<p>“What was the amount?”</p>

<p>“Roughly two thousand pounds.”</p>

<p>“No twenty-pound notes, I suppose?”</p>

<p>“None. He counted it out here, and ten was the
highest value.”</p>

<p>French was delighted. There was no doubt he
was on the right track. Further, three days at £700
just made the required sum.</p>

<p>“In what stock were you to invest?”</p>

<p>“Brazilian. A thousand in Government five per
cents, and the rest in rails.”</p>

<p>This was satisfactory too. French remembered
Roper’s Brazilian passport. At the same time he
was slightly puzzled. Surely the man was not mad
enough to imagine he could get out of the country?
Still, if he thought he was not suspected he might
try to do so.</p>

<p>“Where was the interest to be paid? Did he say
he was going out?”</p>

<p>“Yes. He said he was sailing in a few weeks and
that he already had an account in the Beira Bank at
Rio, to which the dividends were to be paid.”</p>

<p>French laid his photograph and description on the
other’s desk.</p>

<p>“That the man?”</p>

<p>Mr. Dashwood examined the photograph and
slowly read and re-read the description.</p>

<p>“I don’t know,” he said at last. “At first glance I
should say not, but on consideration I’m not so sure.
If it was he, he was disguised.”</p>

<p>“I have reason to believe he was disguised.”</p>

<p>“Then probably it was he. The features which he
couldn’t alter, such as his height and build,
correspond all right.”</p>

<p>“Have you got a specimen of his handwriting?”</p>

<p>Yes, Mr. Dashwood had his signature to certain
forms. French gazed at the four specimens of
“Arthur Lisle Whitman” which were produced. And
then he felt himself up against the same difficulty
which had confronted Mr. Dashwood. At first
sight the signatures were not so obviously Roper’s
as those in the Peveril register, but as French
examined them he felt more and more satisfied that the
man had indeed written them, though he had
obviously made some attempt at disguise.</p>

<p>French was more than pleased with his interview
when, after warning Mr. Dashwood to keep the
affair secret, he took his departure. In the first
place the whole of Roper’s scheme of escape was at
last revealed. The man had evidently set himself
two problems, first, to change his possibly incriminating
twenty-pound notes in such a way that any which
might afterwards be identified should not be
traceable to him, and secondly, to get this money into
Brazilian securities, payable in Brazil, with a similar
immunity from risk. And very cleverly he had
solved both these problems.</p>

<p>But he had made an error, and French smiled
grimly as he thought of it. He had given an address
to Dashwood and Munce. A bad, a fatal error!
A trip to Edinburgh for French, and Master John
Roper’s career would meet with a sudden check.
And with that the Starvel Hollow crime would be
avenged and French—he hoped against hope—would
come in for his reward.</p>

<p>Could he not, French wondered, find out something
about that address without leaving London?
He turned into a telegraph office and sent a wire to
the Edinburgh police. Early next morning there was
a reply.</p>

<p>It seemed that Mr. Andrews Macdonald of 18
Moray Street, Pentland Avenue, through whom
“Mr. Arthur Lisle Whitman” was to be approached,
was a small tobacconist with a rather shady
reputation. It was evident therefore that Roper had
adopted a time-honoured expedient to obtain his
correspondence secretly. Letters could be addressed
to Macdonald and for a consideration they would
either be re-addressed to Roper or be kept till called
for. In either case Macdonald would not know who
his client really was or where he was to be found,
in the event of questions from inquisitive seekers.</p>

<p>French saw that Macdonald, at least if he was a
man of strong character, could give a lot of trouble.
He would admit that he kept letters for Whitman,
but would state that Whitman always called for
these and that he did not know where his client was
to be found. And the closest watch kept by the police
might be quite unavailing. French remembered a
case in point in the East End. Here a small
newsagent had been chosen as the intermediary, and
though the place was kept under observation for
several weeks, the criminal was never seen. It was
only when he was captured through an entirely
different line of research that the reason came out.
The newsagent had guessed his establishment was
being shadowed and he had exhibited a prearranged
sign. He had placed a certain article in a certain
place in his window. The criminal, riding past in a
bus, had seen the danger signal and had kept away.</p>

<p>In the present instance French wished if possible
to avoid the chance of a similar expensive and
irritating delay. If he could devise some other method
of attack, this clue of the tobacconist could be kept
as a last resource.</p>

<p>He took his problem home with him that night,
and after he had dined he drew an arm-chair up to
the fire and settled down comfortably with his pipe
to think the thing out. For a considerable time he
pondered, then at last he thought he saw his way.
He worked at the details of his plan until he was
satisfied with them, then with a smile of triumph on
his lips and deep satisfaction in his heart he knocked
the ashes out of his pipe, switched off the lights and
went up to bed.</p>

</div>

<div class="chapter" id="ch19">

<h2>CHAPTER NINETEEN: The Last Lap</h2>

<p>Next morning Inspector French was early occupied
in making the necessary preparations for his
great <i lang="fr">coup</i>. The first of these involved a visit to
Messrs. Dashwood and Munce, and the business day
had scarcely begun when he presented himself once
more at their office.</p>

<p>“I am sorry, Mr. Dashwood, for troubling you so
soon again,” he apologised, “but I want to ask you
one other question. Can you tell me whether Mr.
Whitman saw your partner during his call? In other
words, if Mr. Whitman were to meet Mr. Munce,
would he recognise him?”</p>

<p>Mr. Dashwood raised his eyebrows, but he
answered without hesitation.</p>

<p>“Mr. Whitman was shown in to me, and so far as
I know, he did not meet my partner. But Mr. Munce
is in his room. We can ask him.”</p>

<p>The junior partner was a more good-natured
looking man than Mr. Dashwood, and French was sorry
he had not had to deal with him throughout.</p>

<p>“No, I didn’t see him,” he said with a pleasant
smile. “As a matter of fact I was out at the time
you mention. I went over——” he looked at
Dashwood—“to see Troughton about eleven and I did
not get back till after lunch.”</p>

<p>French nodded.</p>

<p>“Now, gentlemen,” he went on, “I am obliged for
what you have told me and I am going to ask for
your further help in this matter. What I want is
very simple. If any letter or wire or telephone call
comes to you from Whitman will you please advise
me before replying? That is all.” He repeated to
Mr. Munce what he had already told Mr.
Dashwood as to his suspicion of Whitman’s criminality,
stating that under the circumstances he felt sure
he could count on the assistance of both gentlemen.</p>

<p>Mr. Dashwood hemmed and hawed and was inclined
to demur. He was, he pointed out, a stockbroker,
not a detective, and he didn’t see why he should
be involved in Inspector French’s machinations.
If the Inspector wished to make an arrest it
was up to him to do it himself. But fortunately for
French, Mr. Munce took the opposite view.</p>

<p>“Oh, come now, Dashwood, hang it all,” he
protested, “we’ll have to do what the Inspector wants.
If this Whitman is a murderer we’re pretty well
bound to. Besides, Mr. French doesn’t want us to
make any move, only to sit tight and not spoil his
plans. What do you say, now?”</p>

<p>Mr. Dashwood made a gesture as if washing his
hands of the whole affair, and announced stiffly that
if his partner considered such action in accordance
with the traditional relations between stockbroker
and client he would not press his own views. Mr.
Munce thereupon smiled genially at French and
assured him that he could count on his wishes being
carried out.</p>

<p>This was all right so far as it went, and it paved
the way for French’s next proceeding. Going to the
nearest telegraph office, he saw the postmaster,
showed him his credentials, and explained that he
wished to send a reply prepaid telegram, the answer
to which was not to be delivered at its address, but
was to be sent to him at Scotland Yard. Then
drawing a form towards him he wrote:—</p>

<blockquote><div>

<p>“To Whitman, care of Macdonald, 18 Moray
Street, Pentland Avenue, Edinburgh.</p>
<p>“Serious fall in Brazilian stocks impending.
Advise modification of plans. Would like an interview.
Munce travels to Aberdeen by 10.0 a.m. from King’s
Cross, Tuesday. Could you see him at Waverley
where train waits from 6.15 to 6.33?</p>
<p class="signature">“<span class="name">Dashwood &amp; Munce</span>.”</p>

</div></blockquote>

<p>This, French thought, should draw Roper.
Unless the man was extraordinarily well up in Brazilian
politics, of which the chances were negligible, he
would suspect nothing amiss. And if he did not
suspect a trap he would almost certainly turn up. Not
only would he really be anxious about his money, but
he would see that it would be suspicious not to show
such anxiety.</p>

<p>All the same French believed that the telegram
should be confirmed by a letter. In the ordinary
course of business such a letter would necessarily
follow, and Roper might notice the omission.</p>

<p>To ascertain the form of Messrs. Dashwood and
Munce’s correspondence French adopted a simple
expedient. He wrote confidentially to the firm
saying he had just learnt that the man in whom he was
interested had particularly small ears, and asking
whether Mr. Dashwood had noticed Whitman’s.
This letter he sent by hand and in an hour back came
an answer. It took a comparatively short time to
print a similar letter form, and on this French typed
the following with the same coloured ribbon and
spacing:—</p>

<blockquote><div>

<p>“<span class="name">Dear Sir,</span>—Confirming wire sent you to-day.
We beg to state that we have just had confidential
advices from our agents in Brazil, warning us that
unsettled conditions are imminent which are likely to
depress Government securities considerably. Under
these circumstances we feel that we would like to
discuss the question of your investments, as we think
you would be wiser to modify your original
proposals. In such matters a personal interview is more
satisfactory than correspondence, and as Mr. Munce
happens to be passing through Edinburgh next
Tuesday, we thought perhaps it might be convenient to
you to see him at the station. The train waits long
enough to enable him to explain the situation fully.</p>
<p class="valediction">Yours faithfully,”</p>

</div></blockquote>

<p>French copied the “Dashwood and Munce” signature
and despatched the letter by the evening mail.
He was in hopes that it would allay any suspicion
the telegram might have raised in Roper’s mind,
while at the same time involving no reply to the
stockbrokers other than that of the prepaid wire
which would be delivered at the Yard.</p>

<p>The next point to be considered was the matter of
Roper’s identification. French did not believe he
could manage this himself. He had never seen the
man. He had, of course, a copy of the photograph
on the passport, but he did not consider this sufficient.
In a matter of such importance he dared not leave a
loop-hole for mistake. He felt he must have some
one who knew Roper there to assist him.</p>

<p>He thought at once of Ruth Averill. Of all the
persons he had come across she probably knew
Roper’s appearance best. But he felt the job was
not one for a young girl and he cast round for some
one else.</p>

<p>No one at Thirsby seemed suitable. Several
people there had been acquainted with Roper, but he
did not think any had known him sufficiently
intimately to penetrate a disguise, should the man still
be wearing one. Nor did he believe any one at
Kintilloch would be much better, though for a while he
considered getting Sergeant McGregor.</p>

<p>Finally, he decided that he would ask Philpot.
Philpot had known Roper intimately at the Ransome
and had seen him at intervals up till the tragedy.
He was now in Glasgow: nearer than any one else
that French could get. Moreover, Philpot hated
Roper and would no doubt be glad to put the final
spoke in his wheel. French was sure he would come
for the asking.</p>

<p>Accordingly he drew a sheet of paper to him and
wrote:—</p>

<blockquote><div>

<p class="centered">“<i>Strictly private and confidential,</i></p>
<p class="dateline">“New Scotland Yard.</p>

<p>“<span class="name">Dear Dr. Philpot,</span>—You will be surprised to
hear from me, and particularly to learn that I
believe I have got my hands on the man wanted for
the affair I have been working on. I do not wish to
give details in a letter, but it is a man whom you
know well and whom we all thought to be dead.
You can probably guess from this.</p>

<p>“We have found that under an alias he has been
transferring his money abroad, and in the name of
the stockbrokers concerned I have asked him to meet
their junior partner at Waverley Station,
Edinburgh, on Tuesday next at 6.15 p.m. on the arrival
of the 10.0 a.m. from King’s Cross. The junior
partner will not be there, but I shall, and I hope to
make the arrest.</p>

<p>“My difficulty is that I cannot myself identify the
wanted man. In this I want your kind help. Will
you please meet me under Scott’s Monument at 5.0
p.m.? I shall then ask you to accompany me to the
station and from some inconspicuous place keep a
look-out for him. When you see him you will tell
me and I shall do the rest.</p>

<p>“I ask you to assist me in this, and feel sure that
when you consider all the circumstances of the case
you will agree to do so.</p>

<p>“Will you please wire your decision on receipt of
this letter.</p>

<p class="valediction">“Yours faithfully,</p>
<p class="signature">“<span class="name">Joseph French</span>.”</p>

</div></blockquote>

<p>For the next few hours French was like the
proverbial hen on the hot griddle. Every time his
telephone bell rang he snatched up the receiver hoping
that the caller was the post office from which he had
sent his message. Every time the door opened he
looked up eagerly to see if it was not an orange
coloured telegraph message that was being brought
in. He found it hard to settle to work, so much
depended on his plans succeeding.</p>

<p>When, therefore, about four in the afternoon a
wire was brought to him, he had to exercise real
self-control not to snatch the paper from the
messenger. And then he could have laughed with
delight. The message had been handed in at the
General Post Office in Edinburgh, and read:—</p>

<blockquote><div>

<p class="leftmost">“<span class="name">To Dashwood and Munce,</span></p>
<p class="address">“Dover House,</p>
<p class="dateline">“Gracechurch Street,</p>
<p>“Your wire. Will meet Munce as suggested.</p>
<p class="signature">“<span class="name">Whitman</span>.”</p>

</div></blockquote>

<p>So far, so very excellent! Here was the major
difficulty overcome! On Tuesday evening the public
career of John Roper would come to a sudden stop.
The end of the case was at last in sight.</p>

<p>Early the next morning a second telegram was
handed to French, which gave him almost equally
great satisfaction. It was from Philpot and read:—</p>

<blockquote><div>

<p>“Will meet you place and time stated.”</p>

</div></blockquote>

<p>There was now just one other point to be settled.
Roper was coming to the station to meet Munce.
But Munce was not going to Edinburgh. Some one
must therefore take his place.</p>

<p>It would be better to have some one as like Munce
in appearance as possible. In spite of the statement
of the partners, Roper might have got a glimpse of
Munce or at least have had his description. In view
of this very summons he might make it his business
to learn what the man was like. French considered
his brother officers and he soon saw that Inspector
Tanner, with a slight make-up, could present himself
as a very passable imitation of the junior partner.
The men were about the same build and colouring,
and an alteration in the cut of Tanner’s hair, a pair
of spectacles, different clothes and a change of
manner would do all that was necessary.</p>

<p>French went to Tanner’s room and arranged the
matter. Tanner was to call and see Munce on some
matter of a prospective investment which would
afterwards fall through, and while there observe his
model. He would then make himself up and travel
to Edinburgh by the 10.0 a.m. from King’s Cross.
On reaching Waverley he would co-operate with
French as circumstances demanded.</p>

<p>To enable him to keep his appointment with
Philpot, French found he must leave London on the
Monday night. He therefore took the 11.35 p.m.
from Euston, and about eight o’clock the next
morning reached Princess Street Station. He had not
been to Edinburgh for years, and emerging from the
station, he was struck afresh with the beauty of the
gardens and the splendour of the Castle Rock. But
Princess Street itself, which he had once thought so
magnificent, seemed to have shrunk, and its
buildings to have grown smaller and plainer. “Too much
foreign travel,” he thought, vaguely regretful of his
change of outlook; “the towns abroad certainly spoil
one for ours.”</p>

<p>He spent most of the day in exploring the historic
buildings of the old town, then as five o’clock
approached he entered the Princess Street Gardens,
and strolling towards Scott’s Monument, took his
stand in an inconspicuous place and looked around
him.</p>

<p>Almost immediately he saw Philpot. The doctor
was muffled in a heavy coat, a thick scarf high about
his ears, and fur-lined gloves—a get-up, French
shrewdly suspected, intended more as a disguise from
Roper than a protection from the cold. He was
approaching from the Waverley Station direction,
walking slowly, as if conscious that he was early.
French moved to meet him.</p>

<p>“Well, doctor, this is very good of you. A
surprising development, isn’t it?”</p>

<p>Philpot shook hands, and glancing round, said
eagerly:</p>

<p>“Look here, I want to understand about it. I was
quite thrilled by your letter. You tell me you know
the Starvel murderer, and you seem to hint that it is
Roper—at least, I don’t know whom else you can
refer to. But surely, Inspector, you couldn’t mean
that?”</p>

<p>“Why not?”</p>

<p>“Why not? Why, because— I don’t know, but
the idea seems absolutely absurd. Roper’s dead. If
he is not dead, whose was the third body found?
Are you really serious?”</p>

<p>“Yes,” French said in a low tone. “I am quite
satisfied that Roper escaped from that house and
that some poor devil was murdered and buried in
his place. And what’s more, I’ll have him in an
hour’s time. Come. Let us walk to the station and
take up a position before he arrives.”</p>

<p>They moved off, while Philpot clamoured for
further details. French, true to his traditions of
caution, was not overcommunicative, but he explained
some of the reasons which had led him to believe in
Roper’s guilt, and told of the purchases of rings
which the man had made to get rid of his tainted
money. Philpot evinced the keenest interest and
plied the other with questions.</p>

<p>French told him as much as his training would
allow, which was as little as he conveniently could,
and then he switched the conversation on to the
coming scene. Did Philpot know the station? If so,
where had they best hide so as to see the train
arrive while remaining themselves unobserved?</p>

<p>On reaching the platform French introduced
himself to the station-master and explained his business.
He had arranged for Tanner to travel in the last
first-class compartment in the train, and he now
found out from the station-master where this coach
would stop. Opposite was the window of one of the
offices, and on French asking whether they might use
it for reconnoitring purposes, the station-master at
once gave them the unrestricted use of the room.
There, hidden from view by a screen, the two men
took up their positions and began to scrutinise those
who were assembling on the platform to meet the
train.</p>

<p>Philpot was fidgety and nervous, and from one or
two remarks that he made, French saw the direction
in which his thoughts were running. Evidently he
was afraid that if he assisted in Roper’s capture, the
man would round on him and try to make trouble
for him about Mrs. Philpot’s death. In vain French
attempted to reassure him. He was clearly uneasy
in his mind, but presently he seemed to master his
fears and concentrated his attention on the
platform outside.</p>

<p>Time passed slowly until the train was almost due.
A large number of persons had collected and were
strolling slowly up and down or standing talking in
little groups. French and his companion watched
the moving throng from behind their screen, but no
one resembling Roper put in an appearance. This,
however, was not disconcerting. It was not unlikely
that the man had also taken cover and was waiting
until he saw some one who might be Munce before
coming out into the open.</p>

<p>French, as the time dragged slowly away, was
conscious of the thrill of the hunter who waits before a
clump of jungle for a hidden man-eater. The crisis
that was approaching was almost as important to
him as the tiger’s exit to the sportsman. This was
the last lap of his case, the climax of the work of
many weeks. If he carried off his <i lang="fr">coup</i> all would be
well; it would bring the affair to a triumphant
conclusion, and to himself possibly the reward he
coveted. But if any slip took place it would be a
bad look-out for him. There was his and Tanner’s
time besides the expense of these journeys to
Scotland, not to speak of his own loss of prestige. No,
French felt he could not afford to miss this chance,
and insensibly his brows contracted and his lips
tightened as he stood waiting for what was coming.</p>

<p>Presently a movement amongst the passengers on
the platform and a heavy rumble announced the
advent of the express. The huge engine with its
high-pitched boiler and stumpy funnel rolled slowly past,
followed by coach after coach, brightly lighted,
luxurious, gliding smoothly by. A first-class coach
stopped opposite the window and French, gazing
eagerly out, presently saw Tanner descend and
glance up and down the platform.</p>

<p>Now was the moment! Roper could not be far
away.</p>

<p>But Tanner continued to look searchingly about
him. The additional bustle of the arrival waxed and
waned and the platform began to clear, people
drifting away towards the exit or clustering round
carriage doors close to the train. And still no sign of
Roper.</p>

<p>The express was timed to wait for eighteen
minutes, and of these at least fifteen had slipped
away. Porters were already slamming doors, and
the guard was coming forward, lamp in hand, ready
to give the right away signal. Tanner stepped
forward clear of the train and once again gazed up and
down the platform, then as the hands of the clock
reached the starting time he turned back and
retrieved his suitcase from the compartment. The
guard whistled and waved his green lamp, the
coaches began to glide slowly away, the dull rumble
swelled up and died away, and in a second or two
some rapidly dwindling red lights were all that were
left of the train.</p>

<p>French was almost speechless from chagrin. Had
his plan failed? Was it possible that Roper had
been one too many for him? Had the man suspected
a plant and kept away from the station? Or was he
even now in some hidden nook on the platform
doubtful of Tanner’s identity and waiting to see
what would materialise?</p>

<p>As the minutes slipped away French, unspeakably
disappointed, found himself forced to the conclusion
that the affair had miscarried. Roper must have
become alive to his danger. Perhaps he had
suspected French’s wire and had replied as he did
merely in order to gain time to disappear. Perhaps
by this time the clue of the tobacconist’s shop itself
was a washout. French swore bitterly.</p>

<p>But they could not remain in the office for ever,
nor could Tanner be left to pace the platform
indefinitely. With a word of explanation to Philpot,
French passed out, and the two men strolled in the
direction of Tanner. French greeted him quietly
and introduced Philpot, and the three stood talking.</p>

<p>“Washout?” Tanner said laconically, glancing at
his colleague.</p>

<p>“Looks like it,” French admitted, and turning to
Philpot, began to apologise for having brought him
from Glasgow on a wild goose chase. “I’m sorry
that I can’t stay and offer you hospitality either,” he
went on. “I must get round to police headquarters
and start some further inquiries. But let us go and
have a parting drink to our mutual good luck in the
future.”</p>

<p>They passed into the refreshment room, French
pre-occupied and, for him, somewhat brusque,
Tanner frankly bored, and Philpot showing evidences of
mixed feelings of disappointment and relief.</p>

<p>“I wish you people weren’t so infernally close
about your business,” the doctor complained as they
stood at the bar waiting for the three small Scotches
and sodas French had ordered. “Here am I, vastly
interested in the affair and anxious to know what
your further chances are, and you’re as close as a
pair of limpets. Surely I know so much that a
little more won’t hurt. Do you think you’ll get him
soon?”</p>

<p>French laughed disagreeably.</p>

<p>“I don’t say exactly how soon,” he answered
grimly, “but you may take it from me that we’ll get
him all right. We have a hot scent. We’ll have the
man before any of us are much older. Well,
doctor, here’s yours.”</p>

<p>He tossed off his whisky, while Philpot, picking up
his glass, murmured his toast. And then suddenly
French stiffened and stood motionless, staring at the
other’s hand. There in the flesh at the right hand
side of his right thumb and projecting slightly on to
the nail was an almost healed cut of a peculiar shape:
a shape which French had had described and
sketched for him by seven of the men who had sold
rings to the changer of twenty-pound notes in
London! French’s brain whirled. Surely, surely, it
couldn’t be!</p>

<p>Philpot noted the other’s change of expression
and followed the direction of his gaze. Then with
a sudden gesture of rage and despair he dropped his
glass, and his left hand flashed to the side pocket of
his coat. French had noticed that this pocket bulged
as if it contained some round object of fair size such
as an apple or an orange. Philpot drew out a
dark-coloured ball of some kind and began desperately
fumbling at it with his right hand. And then French
saw what the man was doing. The object was a
Mills’ bomb and he was pulling out the pin!</p>

<p>With a yell to Tanner for help, French flung
himself on the doctor, and clutching his left hand,
squeezed it desperately over the bomb. The pin
was out, but the man’s hand prevented the lever
from moving. If his grasp were relaxed for even an
instant nothing could save all three from being blown
to atoms!</p>

<p>Philpot’s mild and gentle face was convulsed with
fury. His lips receded from his teeth and he snarled
like a wild beast as he struggled wildly to release his
grip. His right fist smashed furiously into French’s
face and he twisted like an eel in the other’s grasp.
Then Tanner also seized him and the three men went
swinging and rolling and staggering about the room,
knocking over tables and chairs and sweeping a row
of glasses from the bar. Philpot fought with the
fury of desperation. To the others it seemed
incredible that so slight a man could show such
strength. He strove desperately to free his left
hand from French’s clasp, while French with both
hands tried for nothing but to keep it tightly closed
on the bomb.</p>

<p>But the struggle was uneven and only one end was
possible. Gradually Tanner improved his grip
until at last he was able to use a kind of jiu-jitsu lock
which held the other steady at the risk of a broken
right arm. This lock he was able to maintain with
his left hand, while with the other he took the pin of
the bomb from the now nerveless fingers and with
infinite care, French shifting his hands to allow of it,
slipped the pin back into place. A moment later the
bomb lay safely on the counter, while its owner sat
faint and exhausted and securely handcuffed.</p>

<p>By the good offices of the barmaid French was able
to wash the blood from his face, and a few minutes
later a taxi was procured, and almost before the
excited throng on the platform had learnt what was
amiss, the three actors in the little drama had
vanished from their ken.</p>

</div>

<div class="chapter" id="ch20">

<h2>CHAPTER TWENTY: Conclusion</h2>

<p>The identity of the criminal known, it took
Inspector French but a short time to compile a
complete and detailed account of that terrible series of
crimes which comprised what had become known as
the Starvel Hollow Tragedy. Herbert Philpot,
once he understood that the evidence against him was
overwhelming and that nothing could save him
from the scaffold, broke down completely and made
a confession which cleared up the few points which
from their nature it was impossible that French
could have learnt otherwise.</p>

<p>The first act of the Inspector, on lodging his
prisoner in jail, was to visit his rooms in Glasgow.
There in a battered leather portmanteau he
discovered a large cashbox of hardened steel which
when broken open was found to contain the balance
of Mr. Averill’s money. With the £2000 which had
been paid to Messrs. Dashwood and Munce, no less
a sum than £36,562 was recovered, no doubt all the
old miser had possessed. Ruth Averill therefore
received her fortune intact, and between the
consequent easing of her circumstances and her
engagement to Pierce Whymper, she found the happiness
which had been denied her during her early years.</p>

<p>The history of the crime, as French at last
presented it, made very terrible reading. Like most
accounts of human weakness and guilt, it arose from
small beginnings and increased stage by stage, until
at last almost inevitably it reached its frightful
consummation.</p>

<p>The trouble first arose in that house near the
Ransome Institute in Kintilloch, when Dr. Philpot
discovered that he and his wife had nothing in
common and that their marriage had been a fatal
blunder. There is no need to recount the steps by which
they drifted apart: it is enough to say that within
two years of the wedding their hatred was mutual
and bitter. Then Philpot became intimate with the
nurse whom Roper afterwards found him embracing
in the Institute shrubbery, and from that time the
idea of getting rid of his wife by murder was never
far from the doctor’s mind. At first he did not see
how this could be done, but as he brooded over the
problem a method presented itself, and coldly and
deliberately he made his preparations.</p>

<p>First, he selected a time when his wife should be
alone with him in the house. Taking advantage of
Flora’s absence one afternoon, he made a pretext
to get Mrs. Philpot up to the bedroom landing.
Silently he slipped upstairs after her and across the
top of the lower flight he tied a dark-brown silk cord.
Then, returning to the study, he called to her for
Heaven’s sake to come quickly for the house was on
fire. She rushed down, caught her foot in the cord,
and fell headlong to the hall below. She was
stunned though not killed, but Philpot was prepared
for this eventuality. Seizing the only implement
he could find, a cricket bat, he struck her savagely on
the temple, killing her instantaneously. As he
expected, the blow made a bruise such as she might
have received from the fall, and no suspicion was
aroused by it.</p>

<p>But an unexpected contingency had given Philpot
away. He had supposed that the servant, Flora,
had really gone to visit her sick mother. But in this
he was mistaken. It was to see, not her mother but
her lover, Roper, that the girl had left the house,
and this afternoon, like many another before it, she
met him in a near-by copse. There, just after they
had greeted each other, a heavy shower came on,
and Flora had proposed an adjournment to the
kitchen for shelter. To this Roper had agreed, and
they had just settled down therein for their fifteen
minutes’ chat when they heard Philpot’s shout to his
wife, followed in a moment by Mrs. Philpot’s
scream of terror and the crash of her fall. Flora
involuntarily sprang to her feet and ran up the stairs
from the basement to the hall. But she was
transfixed by the sight which met her eyes and she stood
rigid, gazing at Philpot. Roper had by this time
crept up the stairs behind her, and both actually saw
the doctor commit the murder. Flora was about to
reveal herself, but Roper’s grip tightened upon her
wrist and held her motionless. Watching thus, they
saw Philpot rapidly examine the body, and
apparently satisfied that life was extinct, wipe the cricket
bat and replace it in the stand. Then he ran
upstairs and removed the silk cord, afterwards
stooping over the floor on the half-way landing. They
could not see what he was doing, but the evidence
given later as to the hole in the carpet made his
action clear.</p>

<p>Then followed a dramatic moment. When
Philpot came downstairs he found Roper and Flora
standing in the hall, and they soon let him know
that they had witnessed the whole of his terrible
proceedings. Philpot attempted to bluster, but he
was quite unable to carry it off, and at last he asked
Roper what he proposed to do.</p>

<p>Roper, in his way quite as unscrupulous as the
doctor, had instantly thought how he might turn the
affair to his own advantage, and he quickly stated
his terms. If Philpot would increase his ten
shillings a week to forty, thus enabling Roper and Flora
to marry in comfort, the evidence against him would
be withheld. Philpot protested, but Roper was
adamant and the doctor had to give way. Had that
been all that Roper required, the matter would have
been settled in five minutes. But the attendant
pointed out that unless he had some material proof
of the crime, his hold over Philpot would be gone
by the evening: if he did not give his testimony at
once he would have to explain later why he had
withheld it. He would therefore follow the
precedent he had set in the case of the nurse, and would
require from Philpot a signed confession of the
murder. He swore solemnly to keep this secret as
long as the money was paid, but with equal solemnity
swore to send it anonymously to the police the first
time the two pounds failed to materialise. Again
Philpot blustered, but again he had to give way.
But he pointed out that a confession would take
some time to prepare, and that if he wrote it then
and there the body would be cold before the police
and another doctor were called in, which would give
the whole affair away. Roper admitted this
difficulty and proposed the following solution. He
would give Philpot until nine o’clock that night to
write it. If it was not forthcoming Flora and he
would visit the police station with the yarn that
Flora alone had seen what had taken place—but
without revealing herself to Philpot; that she had
been so frightened she did not know what to do;
that she had consulted him, Roper, and that he
had told her she must immediately reveal what she
knew.</p>

<p>Philpot had perforce to agree to this, and by nine
o’clock the confession was ready. But Philpot with
perverse ingenuity found a way of tricking his
adversary and rendering it useless. He was an
extraordinarily clever draughtsman and had frequently
amused himself by forging the handwriting of
others. Now he forged his own. He wrote the
confession out, and then copied it, letter by letter,
<em>upside down</em>. The result was a passable imitation
of his own handwriting, but one which any expert
would recognise as a forgery. If the document
were produced his denial of its authorship would be
accepted without question.</p>

<p>But Philpot did not wish the document to be
produced. It was too horribly credible, and inquiries
by the police might easily lead to some discovery
which would convict him. With all the appearance
of reluctant good faith he therefore handed over
the document and promised to pay the two pounds a
week with the utmost regularity. Roper, believing
in the value of his instrument and fearing Philpot
might make an effort to regain it, rented a box in
a safe deposit and stored it there.</p>

<p>Some four months later Philpot, as already stated,
left the Ransome Institute and put up his plate at
Thirsby. There he speedily made the acquaintance
of Mr. Averill. The old man indeed called him in,
thinking that the fees of a newcomer who had to
make his way would be less than those of a
well-established practitioner.</p>

<p>When Roper was dismissed from the Institute
he wrote to Philpot asking if he could help him
towards getting another job, and it was while
thinking over this request that the first idea of the crime
entered the doctor’s mind. His plan was if possible
to get Averill to dismiss his servants and to employ
the Ropers in their places. Then he intended to get
the couple to join with him in the murder of Averill
and the theft of his money.</p>

<p>At first Philpot’s only idea was to obtain as firm
a hold over the Ropers as they had over him, so
as to free himself not only from the serious
financial drain of their blackmail, but also from the
terrible haunting fear that sooner or later they would
betray him. But further consideration showed him
a way by which he could get enormously more than
this. By it not only would he achieve absolute safety
in connection with his wife’s death, but the whole
of Averill’s wealth might be his. It was no doubt
a very terrible plan, for it involved committing two
other murders, but fear and greed had by this time
rendered Philpot almost inhuman and he cared for
nothing but his own welfare. By this plan both the
Ropers were to be done to death in such a way
that suspicion could not possibly fall on himself.
Even suspicion that a crime had been committed at
all was unlikely, but if this by some unforeseen
circumstance were aroused, it would certainly be
believed that Roper had not died, but had committed
the crime himself. After careful thought Philpot
decided to put his plan into operation.</p>

<p>First, he sent Roper a note to meet him at a
secluded point on Arthur’s Seat, Edinburgh, and
there he put up his proposal. Roper listened
eagerly and accepted with alacrity. But in the course
of conversation he made an admission and suggested
a modification which amazed the doctor, but which,
as it fell in with the latter’s secret plan, he agreed
to after some show of objection. Roper, it
appeared, had also made a mistake in his marriage.
He had also grown to hate his wife and would
go to any lengths to regain his freedom. In the
light of the doctor’s proposal he saw his chance.
Old Averill was to be murdered and to cover up
the crime an accident was to be staged. Very well:
Mrs. Roper could be got rid of at the same time.
The same accident would account for both deaths.
The two men discussed the ghastly details, and
by the time they parted the whole hideous affair
was cut and dry. Briefly, the plan was as follows:—</p>

<p>Roper should first arrange his getaway, and while
still living at Kintilloch should apply for a passport
for Brazil. Inquiries about him would come to
the local police, who would certify that he was
the original of the photograph enclosed and that
the matter was in order. Roper would drop a
hint that he had a brother in Santos whom he had
often thought of joining, a course which he
proposed to follow now that he had left the Ransome.
On receipt of the passport he would obtain the
necessary visa.</p>

<p>Philpot in the meantime was to see Averill and
try to get him to dismiss his servants and install
Roper and his wife in their places. As a matter of
fact he found this an easy task. Working on the
old man’s weakness, Philpot explained that having
left the Ransome under a cloud, Roper would be
thankful to take a job at a greatly reduced salary.
This was enough for Averill, and he at once gave
his people notice and offered their positions to the
Ropers.</p>

<p>The couple thereupon settled down at Starvel,
and by living exemplary lives sought to establish
a reputation for integrity which would tend to
support the accident theory to be put forward later.
Philpot insisted that for at least a year they were
to carry out their duties quietly, so that no one
would think the “accident” came suspiciously soon
after their advent. “We are going to make all the
money we want for the rest of our lives,” he would
say to Roper. “No precaution is too great to be
observed.”</p>

<p>Philpot told Roper quite openly that he wished to
use the crime to free himself from the other’s
blackmail. Roper on his part accepted the position, as
he considered the money would be worth it, and also
as he believed that his hold over Philpot would
remain strong enough to protect him completely.
The two scoundrels therefore concluded their evil
compact, deciding to act jointly in all respects and
so to bear equal responsibility. After the crime
Roper was to emigrate to Brazil, the idea that he
had lost his life being suggested by the dreadful
expedient of leaving a third body in the house,
which, it was hoped, would be taken for his.</p>

<p>The procuring of this third body was not the least
of their difficulties. Markham Giles was to be the
victim; in fact it was Giles’ existence which had
suggested the plan to Philpot. The man was known
to be in poor health, and a few doses of a mild
poison would make it poorer still. The result was
that his death at the critical time excited no
comment.</p>

<p>Philpot was to assist in the murders, and partly
as a safeguard against night callers, and partly to
establish an alibi, he determined to fake illness.
He therefore took to his bed on Thursday evening,
telling his housekeeper he had influenza. The
symptoms were easy to simulate and a doctor knows ways
of raising the temperature. His housekeeper and
the aged Dr. Emerson were easily deceived, and on
the two dreadful nights of crime he was able to leave
his house unheard and unsuspected.</p>

<p>For the safe working of the scheme it was
necessary that Ruth Averill should be got rid of. We
have seen how this was done, but it unexpectedly
involved drugging her uncle to prevent the fraud
from becoming known. The plan was, of course,
Philpot’s. He supplied all the necessary forged
letters and the ten pounds, but Roper carried out
the actual details. Ruth left for York on the
Tuesday, and that evening after dusk had fallen Roper
and Philpot met secretly at Markham Giles’ cottage,
and there in cold blood the two miscreants murdered
the unfortunate man by a forcible injection of
cocaine. They left him in bed, Roper undertaking
to “discover” his death next morning. On that
fatal Wednesday morning he arranged the funeral
in such wise that the body would be coffined and
left in the house that night.</p>

<p>The Whymper episode had been thought out to
learn whether or not the numbers of Averill’s notes
were known. Roper would not murder the old man
without Philpot’s actual assistance, lest the doctor
might evade his share of responsibility, so he kept
him drugged to enable the £500 to be obtained.
Whymper on that Wednesday evening was brought
out to Starvel and made the accomplices’ dupe.</p>

<p>On that same fateful evening Roper laid the
foundation of the accident theory by simulating
drunkenness in Thirsby. Of course it was a lucky
chance for him that George Mellowes should
overtake him on the way home, but even without this
he believed he had arranged sufficient evidence of
his condition.</p>

<p>Then came the hideous deeds of that tragic night.
Under cover of darkness Philpot went out to Starvel
and there with almost incredible callousness and
deliberation first Mrs. Roper and then Averill were
done to death by throttling, their bodies being laid
on their respective beds. Next the safe was robbed
and the contents packed in two despatch cases, half
for Philpot and half for Roper. The newspapers
were burned in the safe, the latter locked, and the
key replaced under Averill’s pillow. Finally, petrol
was poured over the house, ready to be set alight
at the proper moment.</p>

<p>The next step was to bring over the body of
Markham Giles. Philpot and Roper took the handcart
from the outhouse and went across the moor to the
unfortunate man’s cottage. There they opened the
coffin, with diabolical coolness took out the remains,
laid them on the handcart, placed a suitable weight
of earth in the coffin and screwed down the lid.
They wheeled the body to Starvel, and carrying it
upstairs, left it on Roper’s bed.</p>

<p>All this time Philpot had carried out his part of
the affair so wholeheartedly that any suspicion that
might have lurked in Roper’s mind as to his
companion’s good faith had been completely dispelled.
But Philpot had been only biding his time until his
dupe had given him all the assistance that he
required with his own even more hideous plan.</p>

<p>As they turned to set fire to the house Philpot
moved rapidly behind his victim and suddenly with
all his strength struck him in the back with a large
knife which he had secreted in his pocket. Roper,
stabbed to the heart, fell and died in a few seconds.</p>

<p>There were now in that sinister house the bodies
of no less than four murdered persons—Giles,
Averill and the two Ropers. But of these only three
must be found. Philpot had foreseen the difficulty
and quickly and methodically he proceeded to meet
it. One of the four bodies must be buried, so that
no suspicion of untoward or unusual events might
afterwards be aroused, and no investigation as to
the identity of the fourth victim might lead to the
truth. He chose that of Giles for two reasons.
First, it was the lightest, and second, if
identification of any of them should prove possible, it would
obviously be safer to have those of Averill and the
Ropers found. The interment accomplished, he
transferred Roper’s portion of the money to his
own despatch case, set the house on fire and returned
unseen to Thirsby.</p>

<p>Philpot was pretty certain that no suspicion would
fall on him, but to safeguard himself still further he
adopted yet another subterfuge. Some months
before the crime he began deliberately to lose money
by betting. When the crime was committed he was
known to be in low water, and he was careful
afterwards to continue gambling, even to the extent of
ruining his ostensible career and going through the
bankruptcy courts. In this way he hoped to dispel
any suggestion that he had recently come into money,
and give a reasonable excuse for quitting Thirsby.</p>

<p>From what French had told him, Philpot realised
that the numbers of some of the stolen notes were
known, and French’s announcement at the inquest
he did not fully believe, fearing a trap. His ready
money was, however, by this time exhausted, and
he set to work to devise means not only to obtain
more, but also to transfer a nest-egg to Brazil, to
which country it had all along been his intention to
emigrate.</p>

<p>The arrangements for this journey he had carried
out with the same careful regard to detail which
had characterised his other actions. Hidden in the
cashbox with Averill’s money French found a
passport made out for Brazil in the name of Arthur
Lisle Whitman, with a photograph of Philpot, viséed
and complete and—a forgery. The way in which
this had been done showed the man’s extraordinary
ingenuity once again. He had obtained in the
ordinary way a passport for himself for holidaying in
France. Roper’s passport with its Brazilian <i lang="fr">visé</i>
he had searched for and stolen before setting fire
to the house. Of these two he had built up a new
one, using certain pages from each. From his own
book he took the description of himself, his stamped
photograph and the vacant pages at the back. On
certain blank pages from Roper’s he forged both
the printing and writing where he could not suitably
alter his own, as well as obtaining a model of the
Brazilian <i lang="fr">visé</i>, which he also forged.</p>

<p>The wretched criminal’s last move, the meeting
with French at Waverley, was on his part a throw
of the dice. On receipt of the wire to Whitman
through the Edinburgh tobacconist he half-suspected
a trap, and of course the plan became apparent when
French’s letter to himself arrived. He saw,
however, that he was either quite safe or irretrievably
lost. If French had no inkling of the truth it was
evident that he must keep the appointment and
continue to play his game. On the other hand, if French
knew, nothing could save him, and he would make an
end of things for all concerned with his Mills’ bomb.</p>

<p>To bring this tale of the Starvel Hollow Tragedy
to a close it remains only to be said that after a
dramatic trial Herbert Philpot paid for his crimes
with his life, while to turn to a happier side of the
picture, Pierce Whymper and Ruth Averill were
united in the bonds of holy matrimony where both
found the happiness which at one time had seemed
likely to be denied them.</p>

</div>
